Advanced Search | arXiv e-print repository
Skip to main content
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Showing 1–6 of 6 results
Search v0.5.6 released 2020-02-24
Query: order: -announced_date_first; size: 25; date_range: from 2025-06-30 to 2025-07-02; classification: Computer Science (cs); include_cross_list: True; terms: AND all=mixture of experts
Refine queryNew search
Simple Search
Terms-0
Search term...
OperatorANDORNOT
FieldTitleAuthor(s)AbstractCommentsJournal referenceACM classificationMSC classificationReport numberarXiv identifierCross-list categoryDOIORCIDarXiv author IDAll fields
Computer Science (cs)
Economics (econ)
Electrical Engineering and Systems Science (eess)
Mathematics (math)
Physics
Physics Archivesallastro-phcond-matgr-qchep-exhep-lathep-phhep-thmath-phnlinnucl-exnucl-thphysicsquant-ph
Quantitative Biology (q-bio)
Quantitative Finance (q-fin)
Statistics (stat)
Include cross-list
Include cross-listed papers
Exclude cross-listed papers
Filter by
All dates
Past 12 months
Specific year
Date range
Year
From
to
Apply to
Submission date (most recent)
Submission date (original)
Announcement date
Show abstracts
Hide abstracts
2550100200
results per page.
Sort results by
Announcement date (newest first)Announcement date (oldest first)Submission date (newest first)Submission date (oldest first)Relevance
Go
arXiv:2507.01351
[pdf, ps, other]
cs.CV
Long-Tailed Distribution-Aware Router For Mixture-of-Experts in Large Vision-Language Model
Authors:
Chaoxiang Cai,
Longrong Yang,
Minghe Weng,
Xuewei Li,
Zequn Qin,
Xi Li
Abstract:
The mixture-of-…
▽ More
The mixture-of-experts (MoE) architecture, which replaces dense networks with sparse ones, has attracted significant attention in large vision-language models (LVLMs) for achieving comparable performance while activating far fewer parameters. Existing MoE architectures for LVLMs primarily focus on token-to-expert routing (TER), encouraging different experts to specialize in processing specific tokens. However, these methods typically rely on the load balancing mechanism, neglecting the inherent distributional differences between vision and language modalities. To address this limitation, we propose the Long-Tailed Distribution-aware Router (LTDR) for vision-language TER, which tackles two key challenges: (1) Modality-specific distribution-aware routing. We observe that language TER generally follows a relatively uniform distribution, whereas vision TER exhibits a long-tailed distribution. This modality discrepancy motivates the design of specialized routing strategies for each modality. (2) Vision-specific dynamic expert activation. Recognizing the importance of high-information vision tail tokens, we introduce a data-augmentation-inspired strategy that increases the number of activated experts, ensuring sufficient learning for these rare but informative tokens. On vision-language and vision benchmarks, our approach achieves consistent improvements, boosting performance by 1.2% / 2.1% on vision-language and 1.6% on vision benchmarks.
△ Less
Submitted 2 April, 2026; v1 submitted 2 July, 2025;
originally announced July 2025.
arXiv:2507.01337
[pdf, ps, other]
cs.IT
eess.SP
doi
10.1109/ICCT67417.2025.11374177
Dynamical Multimodal Fusion with Mixture-of-Experts for Localizations
Authors:
Bohao Wang,
Zitao Shuai,
Fenghao Zhu,
Chongwen Huang,
Yongliang Shen,
Zhaoyang Zhang,
Qianqian Yang,
Sami Muhaidat,
Merouane Debbah
Abstract:
…accuracy, especially in non-line-of-sight (NLOS) scenarios. To solve these problems, we introduce SCADF-MoE, a spatial-context aware dynamic fusion network built on a soft mixture-of-…
▽ More
Multimodal fingerprinting is a crucial technique to sub-meter 6G integrated sensing and communications (ISAC) localization, but two hurdles block deployment: (i) the contribution each modality makes to the target position varies with the operating conditions such as carrier frequency, and (ii) spatial and fingerprint ambiguities markedly undermine localization accuracy, especially in non-line-of-sight (NLOS) scenarios. To solve these problems, we introduce SCADF-MoE, a spatial-context aware dynamic fusion network built on a soft mixture-of-experts backbone. SCADF-MoE first clusters neighboring points into short trajectories to inject explicit spatial context. Then, it adaptively fuses channel state information, angle of arrival profile, distance, and gain through its learnable MoE router, so that the most reliable cues dominate at each carrier band. The fused representation is fed to a modality-task MoE that simultaneously regresses the coordinates of every vertex in the trajectory and its centroid, thereby exploiting inter-point correlations. Finally, an auxiliary maximum-mean-discrepancy loss enforces expert diversity and mitigates gradient interference, stabilizing multi-task training. On three real urban layouts and three carrier bands (2.6, 6, 28 GHz), the model delivers consistent sub-meter MSE and halves unseen-NLOS error versus the best prior work. To our knowledge, this is the first work that leverages large-scale multimodal MoE for frequency-robust ISAC localization.
△ Less
Submitted 1 July, 2025;
originally announced July 2025.
Journal ref:
in 2025 IEEE 25th International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT), Shenyang, China, 2025, pp. 1440-1446
arXiv:2507.00390
[pdf, ps, other]
cs.LG
MoNE: Replacing Redundant Experts with Lightweight Novices for Structured Pruning of MoE
Authors:
Geng Zhang,
Yuxuan Han,
Yuxuan Lou,
Yiqi Zhang,
Wangbo Zhao,
Yang You
Abstract:
Mixture-of-…
▽ More
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) enables efficient scaling of large language models by activating only a subset of experts per input token. However, deploying MoE-based models incurs significant memory overhead due to the need to retain all experts in memory. While structured pruning is promising to reduce memory costs, existing methods often show suboptimal performance and unstable degradation in three dimensions: model architectures, calibration data sources, and calibration sample sizes. This paper proposes Mixture-of-Novices-and-Experts (MoNE), a novel expert pruning method that replaces redundant experts with lightweight novices to achieve effective and robust model compression. MoNE evaluates expert redundancy based on two metrics: access frequency and output variance. Experts exhibiting low usage and stable outputs are pruned and replaced with lightweight novices-unbiased estimations of their original outputs-minimizing performance degradation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that MoNE consistently outperforms baseline methods with minimal accuracy degradation across the three dimensions, confirming its effectiveness and robustness. Notably, it outperforms baselines by up to 2.72 for the average zero shot accuracy across nine downstream tasks under 25% pruning ratio, with only 0.14 performance drop for Qwen2-57B-A14B. The code is available at https://github.com/zxgx/mode-pd.
△ Less
Submitted 21 February, 2026; v1 submitted 30 June, 2025;
originally announced July 2025.
Comments:
Accepted by ICLR 2026
arXiv:2506.23971
[pdf, ps, other]
cs.LG
UMA: A Family of Universal Models for Atoms
Authors:
Brandon M. Wood,
Misko Dzamba,
Xiang Fu,
Meng Gao,
Muhammed Shuaibi,
Luis Barroso-Luque,
Kareem Abdelmaqsoud,
Vahe Gharakhanyan,
John R. Kitchin,
Daniel S. Levine,
Kyle Michel,
Anuroop Sriram,
Taco Cohen,
Abhishek Das,
Ammar Rizvi,
Sushree Jagriti Sahoo,
Zachary W. Ulissi,
C. Lawrence Zitnick
Abstract:
…how to increase model capacity alongside dataset size to achieve the best accuracy. The UMA small and medium models utilize a novel architectural design we refer to as mixture of linear experts that enables increasing model capacity without sacrificing speed. For example, UMA-medium has 1.4B parameters but only ~50M ac…
▽ More
The ability to quickly and accurately compute properties from atomic simulations is critical for advancing a large number of applications in chemistry and materials science including drug discovery, energy storage, and semiconductor manufacturing. To address this need, Meta FAIR presents a family of Universal Models for Atoms (UMA), designed to push the frontier of speed, accuracy, and generalization. UMA models are trained on half a billion unique 3D atomic structures (the largest training runs to date) by compiling data across multiple chemical domains, e.g. molecules, materials, and catalysts. We develop empirical scaling laws to help understand how to increase model capacity alongside dataset size to achieve the best accuracy. The UMA small and medium models utilize a novel architectural design we refer to as mixture of linear experts that enables increasing model capacity without sacrificing speed. For example, UMA-medium has 1.4B parameters but only ~50M active parameters per atomic structure. We evaluate UMA models on a diverse set of applications across multiple domains and find that, remarkably, a single model without any fine-tuning can perform similarly or better than specialized models. We are releasing the UMA code, weights, and associated data to accelerate computational workflows and enable the community to continue to build increasingly capable AI models.
△ Less
Submitted 4 March, 2026; v1 submitted 30 June, 2025;
originally announced June 2025.
Comments:
33 pages, 8 figures
arXiv:2506.23648
[pdf, ps, other]
cs.CV
MReg: A Novel Regression Model with MoE-based Video Feature Mining for Mitral Regurgitation Diagnosis
Authors:
Zhe Liu,
Yuhao Huang,
Lian Liu,
Chengrui Zhang,
Haotian Lin,
Tong Han,
Zhiyuan Zhu,
Yanlin Chen,
Yuerui Chen,
Dong Ni,
Zhongshan Gou,
Xin Yang
Abstract:
…categories. Second, we design a feature selection and amplification mechanism to imitate the sonographer's diagnostic logic for accurate MR grading. Third, inspired by the Mixture-of-Experts concept, we introduce a feature summary module to extract the category-level features, enhancing the representational capacit…
▽ More
Color Doppler echocardiography is a crucial tool for diagnosing mitral regurgitation (MR). Recent studies have explored intelligent methods for MR diagnosis to minimize user dependence and improve accuracy. However, these approaches often fail to align with clinical workflow and may lead to suboptimal accuracy and interpretability. In this study, we introduce an automated MR diagnosis model (MReg) developed on the 4-chamber cardiac color Doppler echocardiography video (A4C-CDV). It follows comprehensive feature mining strategies to detect MR and assess its severity, considering clinical realities. Our contribution is threefold. First, we formulate the MR diagnosis as a regression task to capture the continuity and ordinal relationships between categories. Second, we design a feature selection and amplification mechanism to imitate the sonographer's diagnostic logic for accurate MR grading. Third, inspired by the Mixture-of-Experts concept, we introduce a feature summary module to extract the category-level features, enhancing the representational capacity for more accurate grading. We trained and evaluated our proposed MReg on a large in-house A4C-CDV dataset comprising 1868 cases with three graded regurgitation labels. Compared to other weakly supervised video anomaly detection and supervised classification methods, MReg demonstrated superior performance in MR diagnosis. Our code is available at: https://github.com/cskdstz/MReg.
△ Less
Submitted 30 June, 2025;
originally announced June 2025.
Comments:
10 pages, 5 figures, accepted by MICCAI 2025
arXiv:2506.23635
[pdf, ps, other]
cs.DC
cs.AI
cs.PF
doi
10.1145/3649601.3698722
Towards Building Private LLMs: Exploring Multi-Node Expert Parallelism on Apple Silicon for Mixture-of-Experts Large Language Model
Authors:
Mu-Chi Chen,
Po-Hsuan Huang,
Xiangrui Ke,
Chia-Heng Tu,
Chun Jason Xue,
Shih-Hao Hung
Abstract:
…Apple Intelligence. A Mac Studio cluster with Apple's M2 Ultra chips is established as a cost-efficient solution to host and accelerate the pretrained DBRX model with the Mixture-of-…
▽ More
Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized Artificial Intelligence (AI) with significant advancements such as OpenAI's ChatGPT, Meta's Llama, and Databricks' DBRX. This paper addresses the cost and scalability challenges encountered when constructing private LLM systems for personal or small group services, as aimed by Apple Intelligence. A Mac Studio cluster with Apple's M2 Ultra chips is established as a cost-efficient solution to host and accelerate the pretrained DBRX model with the Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architecture. Our performance analysis reveal that parallel execution of the model's experts across two to four machine nodes significantly reduces inference time. We find that computation time for the experts is comparable to the communication time for exchanging their outputs, emphasizing the importance of network latency over bandwidth. We also observe significant management overhead due to Apple software stack's memory management logic. Based on these findings, we develop optimization schemes to eliminate the memory management overhead. As a result, the Mac Studio cluster is 1.15 times more cost-efficient than the state-of-the-art AI supercomputer with NVIDIA H100 GPUs. In addition, we construct a performance model to estimate system performance under varying configurations, and the model provides valuable insights for designing private LLM systems.
△ Less
Submitted 30 June, 2025;
originally announced June 2025.
Comments:
International Conference on Research in Adaptive and Convergent Systems (RACS '24), November 5--8, 2024, Pompei, Italy
ACM Class:
I.6.4; I.2.7; I.2.11
Search v0.5.6 released 2020-02-24
We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.
About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)
Major funding support from
