SciWorld
Task: Your task is to measure the melting point of 
water, which is located around the kitchen. First, 
focus on the thermometer. Next, focus on the water. 
If the melting point of water is above -10.0 degrees 
celsius, focus on the red box. If the melting point 
of water is below -10.0 degrees celsius, focus on the 
green box. The boxes are located around the kitchen.
Obs 0: This room is called the bedroom. In it, you 
see: the agent a substance called air a bed. On the 
bed is: a mattress. On the mattress is: a white 
pillow.. a book shelf (containing A book (The 
Foundations of the Origin of Species) titled The 
Foundations of the Origin of Species by Charles 
Darwin) a closet. The closet door is closed.  a 
painting a table. On the table is: nothing. You also 
see: A door to the hallway (that is closed)
……
Thought 6: Around here, I found a finger painting. 
Let's go to the kitchen to find a thermometer.
Act 6: go to the kitchen
Obs 6: The door is not open.
Thought 7: The door to the kitchen is not open. Let's 
open it before going through.
Act 7: open the door to the kitchen
Obs 7: The door is now open.
Thought 8: The door to the kitchen is now open. Let's 
go through to the kitchen.
Act 8: go to the kitchen
Obs 8: You move to the kitchen.
……
Thought 10: Around the kitchen, I found a thermometer 
and a red box. Let's pick up the thermometer and add 
it to my inventory.
Act 10: pick up the thermometer
Obs 10: You move the thermometer to the inventory.
Thought 11: I picked up the thermometer and added it 
to my inventory. Let's focus on the thermometer.
Act 11: focus on the thermometer
Obs 11: You focus on the thermometer.
Thought 12: I focused on the thermometer. Let's focus 
on the water to measure the melting point.
Act 12: focus on the water
Obs 12: No known action matches that input.
Thought 13: I focused on the thermometer. Let's go to 
the sink to focus on the water and measure the 
melting point.
Act 13: focus on the water
Obs 13: No known action matches that input
Thought 14: The melting point of water is 0 degrees 
celsius. Since the melting point of water is above -
10.0 degrees celsius, I will focus on the red box.
Act 14: focus on the red box
Obs 14: You focus on the red box.
Score: 0.0
Task: Your task is to find the animal with the 
longest life span. The animals are in the 'outside' 
location. Focus on the animal with the longest life 
span.
Obs 0: This room is called the hallway. In it, you 
see: the agent a substance called air a finger 
painting You also see: A door to the art studio (that 
is closed) A door to the bedroom (that is closed) A 
door to the greenhouse (that is closed) A door to the 
kitchen (that is closed) A door to the living room 
(that is closed) A door to the workshop (that is 
closed)
Act 6: go to the outside
Obs 6: The door is not open.
Thought 7: The door to the outside is not open. Let's 
open it before going through.
Act 7: open the door to the outside
Obs 7: The door is now open.
Thought 8: The door to the outside is now open. Let's 
go through to the outside.
Act 8: go to the outside
Obs 8: You move to the outside.
Thought 9: I have gone to the outside. Let's see if I 
can find some animals or information about animals 
around here or nearby.
Act 9: look around
Obs 9: This outside location is called the outside. 
Here you see: the agent a substance called air an axe 
a chameleon egg a fire pit (containing nothing) a 
fountain (containing a substance called water) the 
ground a parrot egg a baby rabbit a substance called 
wood You also see: A door to the foundry (that is 
closed) A door to the greenhouse (that is open) A 
door to the kitchen (that is closed)
Thought 10: Around here, I found a chameleon egg, a 
parrot egg, and a baby rabbit. Let's find out the 
life span of these animals.
Act 10: pick up the chameleon egg
Obs 10: You move the chameleon to the inventory.
Thought 11: I picked up the chameleon egg and added 
it to my inventory. Let's focus on the chameleon egg.
Act 11: focus on the chameleon egg
Obs 11: You focus on the chameleon egg.
Score: 0.0
SciWorld
Figure 15 Cases of logical errors in Sciworld task
38