Base Model
Thought 1: The task is to find a living thing and 
move it to the purple box in the bedroom. In the 
greenhouse, a bee hive is the only potential living 
thing listed, but it is closed. The peach tree, pea 
plant, and banana tree are all living things, but 
they are in flower pots. I'll start by opening the 
bee hive to check if there are any bees inside.
Act 1: open bee hive door
Obs 1: No known Act matches that input.
Thought 2: It seems there was a misunderstanding. 
Since there are living things in the flower pots 
(peach tree, pea plant, and banana tree), I should 
start by focusing on one of them. Let's begin with 
the peach tree, as it is in a recognizable stage and 
might be more obvious.
Act 2: focus on flower pot 4
Obs 2: You focus on the flower pot 4.
Score: 0.0
SciWorld
Task: Find a(n) living thing. First, focus on the thing. Then, move it to the purple 
box in the bedroom.
Obs 0: This room is called the greenhouse. In it, you see: the agent, a substance called air, a bee hive. The bee 
hive door is closed. a flower pot 3 (containing nothing), a flower pot 4 (containing a peach tree in the adult 
stage, soil), a flower pot 5 (containing a pea plant in the adult stage with a tall height, soil), a flower pot 8 
(containing nothing), a flower pot 9 (containing a banana tree in the adult stage, soil), a jug (containing 
nothing), a shovel, a sink, which is turned off. In the sink is: nothing.You also see: A door to the hallway (that 
is closed) A door to the outside (that is closed)
Thought 1: My task is to find a living thing, focus 
on it, and move it to the purple box in the bedroom.
Act 1: look around
Obs 1: …
Thought 2: Around the greenhouse, I found a peach 
tree, a pea plant, and a banana tree. Let's pick up 
the banana tree.
Act 2: pick up the banana tree
Obs 2: You move the plant to the  inventory.
Thought 3: I picked up the banana tree and added it 
to my inventory. Let's focus on the banana tree.
Act 3: focus on the banana tree
Obs 3: You focus on the banana tree.
……
Thought 7: Around the hallway, I found the agent, a 
picture, and some other rooms. Let's go to the 
bedroom to find the purple box.
Act 7: go to the bedroom
Obs 7: The door is not open.
Thought 8: The door to the bedroom is not open. Let's 
open it before going through.
Act 8: open the door to the bedroom
Obs 8: The door is now open.
Thought9: Around the hallway, I found the agent, a 
picture, and some other rooms. Let's go to the 
bedroom to find the purple box.
Act 9: go to the bedroom
Obs 9: You move to the bedroom.
Thought 11: Around the bedroom, I found a purple box. 
Let's move the banana tree into the purple box.
Act 11: put the banana tree in the purple box
Obs 11: You move the banana tree to the purple box.
Score: 100
Our RL Model
Figure 14 Smart case of our RL agent compared to the base model on SciWorld task.
37