A query case of BabyAI can be seen below:
BabyAI Example
You are an exploration master that wants to finish every goal you are given. Every round I will give
you an observation, and you have to respond an action and your thought based on the observation to
finish the given task. You are placed in a room and you need to accomplish the given goal with actions.
You can use the following actions:
- turn right - turn left - move forward - go toobj id - pick upobj id
- go throughdoor id : door must be an open door.
- toggle and go throughdoor id : door can be a closed door or a locked door. If you want to open a
locked door, you need to carry a key that is of the same color as the locked door.
- toggle: there is a closed or locked door right in front of you and you can toggle it.
Your goal: Go to the red ball.
Settings. Following the original implementation, we divide the tasks into six subsets based on the final
goal. We set the maximum number of interactions to20 turns. In SFT baselines, we set the learning rate to
1 × 10−4. We employ GRPO as the main RL algorithm with a learning rate of1 × 10−6, a KL cofficient of
1 × 10−3, and a sampling temperature of1.0. We sample8 distinct trajectories for a single query.
B.5 Scientific Scenario
Tools and APIs. SciWorld[69] is an agent environment for scientific tasks. It provides APIs that are
designed to support scientific exploration through text-driven reasoning cycles. These APIs empower agents
to conduct experiments by interacting with various scientific apparatus and performing actions like measuring
temperature, connecting electrical circuits, and mixing chemicals.
A query case of SciWorld can be seen below:
SciWorld Example
You are an agent for science world. Every round I will give you an observation, you have to respond
an action based on the observation to finish the given task.
Your task is to boil water. For compounds without a boiling point, combusting the substance is also
acceptable. First, focus on the substance. Then, take actions that will cause it to change its state of
matter.
Settings. We select 8 subsets of tasks from the original SciWorld environment. We set the maximum
number of interactions between the agent and the environment to20 turns. In SFT baselines, we set the
learning rate to1 × 10−4. We employ GRPO as the main RL algorithm with a learning rate of1 × 10−6, a KL
cofficient of1 × 10−3, ans a sampling temperature of1.0. We sample8 distinct trajectories for a single query.
C Trajectory examples and visualizations of our RL agent
This appendix provides additional trajectory visualizations across multiple environments. The figures illustrate
the behaviors of both baseline and RL-trained agents, highlighting the RL model’s superior performance in
exploration, task execution, and interaction patterns, while also revealing common failure modes that remain.
34