Figure 2 Overview of the AgentGym-RL framework. It features a decoupled, flexible, and extensible architecture,
comprising three primary modules—the environment, the agent, and the training module. It supports diverse scenarios,
environments, and algorithms.
Our extensive experiments prove that AgentGym-RL delivers consistent and significant performance gains
for agents across five tasks spanning 5 scenarios (Figure 1a). Open-source models (e.g., Qwen-2.5-7B [83])
trained with our framework and method achieved an average improvement of 33.65 points, matching—or even
outperforming—larger commercial, closed-source models such as OpenAI-o3 [42] and Gemini-2.5-Pro [10]. We
also conducted numerous analytical experiments to provide key findings and insights, showing that scaling
post-training and test-time compute have significant potential for developing agentic intelligence (Figure 1b).
We hope our work will be a valuable contribution to the community’s progress.
In summary, our main contributions are:
1. We propose and open-source AgentGym-RL, a new unified, modular, and flexible end-to-end RL
framework designed for agent multi-turn interactive decision-making that includes a diversity of scenarios
and environments.
2. We propose ScalingInter-RL, a progressive interaction-scaling framework that incrementally adapts
agents to their environment, facilitating the refinement of interaction patterns and skill acquisition. It
enhances optimization stability in RL and achieves a balance between exploration and exploitation.
3. Our extensive experiments demonstrate that AgentGym-RL and ScalingInter-RL deliver significant
and consistent performance gains, matching or exceeding commercial models. In addition, we conduct
empirical analyses that yield critical insights into agent design and operational paradigms, offering
valuable guidance and resources for future research.
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Formulation
In this work, we study the multi-turn interactive decision-making tasks, i.e., agentic tasks, and we model them
as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process (POMDP)(U , S, A, O, T , r) like Xi et al.[77], Zhou et al.
3