2
Data:interleaved
Markov Chains
with lag 1 and 2
X1 X2 X3 X4 X5
lagk= 1
lagk= 2
T ask:predict the
next token by se-
lecting in-context
the correct causal
structure
s1 s2 s3 s4 . . . si−2 si−1 si si+1
k= 1?
k= 2?
Input sequencewith true lagk= 2
How do 3-layer attention-only transformers solve this task?
L1: extracts single transition
probabilities for each lag
L2: aggregates transition
probabilities from the past
L3:selective induction head
select the most likely lag
Figure 1.Summary of the framework. Top:We define a new task based on Interleaved Markov Chains of
different lags (k= 1andk= 2in the example).Middle:given a sequence generated from a chain of unknown
lag, the model has to identify the true lag, and use it to predict the distribution of the next token.Bottom:
attention-only transformers can solve this task with 3 layers. The first computes the transition probabilities for
each lag seen during training, the second aggregates these probabilities over the entire past, and finally the third
layer implements the selective induction head, which selects the correct lag.
In-context causal structure selection.Recently, Markov chains have been employed to formulate
interesting sequence-to-sequence tasks that can be solved by transformers with interpretable solutions
[Ildiz et al., 2024, Nichani et al., 2024, Makkuva et al., 2024, Edelman et al., 2024]. In particular,
Nichani et al. [2024] show that transformers trained on Markov Chain sequences learn circuits that
capture the causal structure, i.e., the set of parent tokens for each token in the sequence and estimate
transition probabilities in-context. The existing works relying on Markov chains fail to model the nuanced
relationships typical of natural language. The same word pair can have different causal relationships
depending on the surrounding context. While an effective model should recognize these contextual
dependencies, previous research has overlooked this consideration by adopting fixed causal structures. To
address this limitation, we proposea new synthetic taskdesigned to mimic different causal dependencies
(Sec. 4). We considerInterleaved Markov Chains, with fixed transition probabilities between states
but different underlying causal structures (Fig. 1), and theoretically study how 3-layer attention-only
transformers learn to correctly predict the next token in a sequence.
Selective induction heads.To solve the task at hand—correctly predicting the next token in-context
in a sequence generated within this setup (middle of Fig. 1)—transformers need to learn a circuit that
adapts to the given context to select the correct causal structure among those seen during training. We
call this circuit aselective induction head, as it differs fundamentally from the induction heads introduced
so far in the literature, where the circuit learns either to copy a token from a certain position fixed by the
unique structure of the data or by comparing its semantics. In our task, the transformer (with attention
maps depicted in Fig. 1) needs to learn to aggregate all past information to determine from which past
position the corresponding token should be copied in order to predict the next token.
A transformer construction for in-context selection.To understand and formalize the selective
heads, we provide aninterpretableconstruction of the self-attention layer weights in a 3-layer attention-
only disentangled transformer [Friedman et al., 2023] that implements this mechanism (Sec. 5). We
empirically demonstrate that the constructed transformer matches the performance of both disentangled
and standard transformers trained from scratch (Sec. 6) and that 2-layer attention-only transformers
cannot solve the task. Moreover, we observe that the attention maps of the trained and constructed
transformers present the same patterns, further supporting the validity of our algorithm. Finally, we