SELECTIVE INDUCTION HEADS: HOW TRANSFORMERS
SELECT CAUSAL STRUCTURES IN CONTEXT
Francesco D’Angelo, Francesco Croce, Nicolas Flammarion
Theory of Machine Learning Lab, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland
Abstract.Transformers have exhibited exceptional capabilities in sequence modeling tasks, lever-
aging self-attention and in-context learning. Critical to this success are induction heads, attention
circuits that enable copying tokens based on their previous occurrences. In this work, we introduce a
novel framework that showcases transformers’ ability to dynamically handle causal structures. Existing
works rely on Markov Chains to study the formation of induction heads, revealing how transformers
capture causal dependencies and learn transition probabilities in-context. However, they rely on a fixed
causal structure that fails to capture the complexity of natural languages, where the relationship be-
tween tokens dynamically changes with context. To this end, our framework varies the causal structure
through interleaved Markov chains with different lags while keeping the transition probabilities fixed.
This setting unveils the formation ofSelective Induction Heads, a new circuit that endows transform-
ers with the ability to select the correct causal structure in-context. We empirically demonstrate that
transformers learn this mechanism to predict the next token by identifying the correct lag and copying
the corresponding token from the past. We provide a detailed construction of a 3-layer transformer to
implement the selective induction head, and a theoretical analysis proving that this mechanism asymp-
totically converges to the maximum likelihood solution. Our findings advance the understanding of how
transformers select causal structures, providing new insights into their functioning and interpretability.
1.Introduction
As autoregressive generative models continue to scale and are increasingly deployed in real-world ap-
plications, the question of how Transformer models [Vaswani et al., 2017] function internally becomes
pressing. Yet the inherent complexity of natural language hinders the ability to fully comprehend how
these models make decisions and work internally. To address this challenge, many recent works have
attempted to formulate synthetic frameworks that simplify the problem and enable theoretical analysis
while still capturing the remarkable properties and phenomena observed in large language models, such
as in-context learning [Brown, 2020, Garg et al., 2022, Bai et al., 2023, Von Oswald et al., 2023, Sander
et al., 2024, Chan et al., 2022]. Mechanistic interpretability [Olsson et al., 2022] emerges as a line of
research focused on reverse-engineering the complex computations performed inside a transformer in
order to understand how a certain output is produced for a given input. This research has uncovered
the formation of induction heads [Olsson et al., 2022] i.e., interpretable circuits embedded within the
transformer’s weights, capable of simple operations such as copying tokens. By examining such cir-
cuits and their combinations, one can understand the algorithms that transformers implement to solve
a given task. For instance, [Nichani et al., 2024, Bietti et al., 2023, Edelman et al., 2024] demonstrated
that induction heads enable transformers to implement in-context bigrams for next-token predictions
in Markov Chains. Such mechanisms are not limited to simplified models: Nguyen [2024] showed that
transformers may rely on N-gram rules even in natural language processing. Yet the process by which
transformers select between such learned rules remains poorly understood. While in-context learning
studies how transformers solve tasks from demonstrations in the prompt,in-context selectionfocuses
on how transformers select the most suitable approach to solve a given task from those encountered
during training, using instances present in the context. For example, Bai et al. [2023] examines how
transformers perform in-context algorithm selection when pre-trained on mixtures of linear and logistic
regression with different noise. Similarly, Yadlowsky et al. [2023] studied the ability of transformers to
perform model selection between different function class families. Our work takes another step toward
understanding this selection process, leveraging Markov chains with different causal structures.
E-mail address:francesco.dangelo@epfl.ch.
Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2025https: // openreview. net/ forum? id= bnJgzAQjWf.
1
arXiv:2509.08184v1  [cs.LG]  9 Sep 2025