12
0 50 100
Sequence Length
10 4
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
KL Divergence
= {1, 2, 3}
BMA
ML
 train 3H 
 train 1H
 train 3H
 constr. 1H
 constr. 3H
Figure 4.Performance of our constructed transformers, trained transformers, and theoretical
estimator (BMA, ML).First plot: lags 1,2,3. Second: the model solves the task with non-contiguous lags.
Third: the model is effective with additional lags. Fourth: one head is enough for two lags.
step, we generate a fresh batch (size256) of sequences (length128) via Alg. 1, and train using Adam
optimizer with fixed learning rate0.001and no weight decay. For the standard transformer, we tested
embedding sizes of64and128, andd QK = 32. For the constructions, we fixβ= 100andλ= 500. We
reportD KL between the true and predicted next-token distribution along the sequence. We generate
different tasks with alphabet size|S|= 5(no differences are observed for other sizes) varying the number
and values of lags:K={1,2,3}(our example) andK={1,2,3,4,5}for the case of contiguous lags
(optimal number of heads3and5according to Proposition 1),K={1,3,4}to show non-contiguous lags
(4heads needed, see App. G), andK={1,3}for the special case of two lags.
Main results.We observe in Fig. 4 how the construction with optimal number of heads, indicated
as ˜Tconstr. in the plots, matches the performance of the maximum likelihood. Moreover, both the
disentangled transformers trained from scratch (˜Ttrain) and the standard one (Ttrain) match the
performance of the theoretical construction. Interestingly, we instead observe that when the number of
heads is fixed to1the trained transformers can find solutions which perform better than the construction:
this indicates the existence of more efficient, yet elusive and non-interpretable, ways of aggregating the
transition probabilities, and that gradient descent can find them. Finally, we illustrate how for the simple
case of two lags (last plot in Fig. 4) our construction with single head (detailed in App H) attains the
optimal sample complexity, while the construction in App. G would assume using more heads. Moreover,
in this case, it appears that the trained transformers can obtain performances closer to the BMA rather
than the ML for small sequence lengths.
T rained vs constructed attention maps.In Fig. 5 we report the attention maps for the three lay-
ers for the caseK={3,5,7}for the trained standard transformer (top row), the trained disentangled
transformer (middle row) and our construction (see construction in App. G) (bottom row).We observe
that the attention maps of the first and third layers are nearly identical between the trained and the-
oretical models, with these layers functioning precisely as expected from the theoretical construction.
Notably, the attention entries of the first layer are proportional tologP ⋆, even when the model is
trained from scratch and for both the disentangled and standard cases. For the second layer (aggrega-
tion), the trained transformers converge to a slightly different structure, likely because aggregation is