11
5.3.Equiv alence with Maximum Likelihood
The disentangled transformer we propose does not rely on likelihood nor computes the BMA. Due to the
normalization applied by the softmax function, the model infers the lag of the sequence using the sum
of normalized probabilities˜p. For the inference to be accurate, the cumulative sum corresponding to the
correct lagPi
n=ˆk+1 ˜pn,k⋆ must be larger than that of any other lag. This fact is formalized in terms of
expected values in the following claim:
Claim 1.LetKbe a subset of integers andX t an interleaved Markov chain of lagk∈ K, then, for
r∈ Kandi≥ ˆk,
E
h X ⊤
i−rP ⋆XiP
l∈K X ⊤
i−lP ⋆Xi
i
≤E
h X ⊤
i−kP ⋆Xi
P
l∈K X ⊤
i−lP ⋆Xi
i
.
While simpler cases (e.g., two lags, no normalization, or independent lags) are proven in App. A, we leave
the complete proof of Claim 1 for future work. However, we provide empirical validation of this claim
in Fig. 3 (left); more details and additional experiments are reported in App E. Due to ergodicity, the
average 1
T
PT
i=1 ˜pi,r converges to its expected value, and for large enoughTit is higher for the correct
lag. Therefore, applying the exponential and scaling the temperatureβleads to the same result as MLE
in the asymptotic limit, as shown in Fig. 3 (right).
0.020 0.025 0.030 0.035
E[
X ⊤
i−kP ⋆Xi∑
l∈K X ⊤
i−lP ⋆Xi
]−maxr̸=k
r∈K
E[
X ⊤
i−rP ⋆Xi∑
l∈K X ⊤
i−lP ⋆Xi
]
0
250
500
750
1000
1250Frequency
0 50 100
Sequence Length
10 4
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
KL Divergence
KL for = {1, 2, 3}
BMA
ML
= 1.0
= 2.0
= 5.0
= 10.0
= 25.0
= 100.0
Figure 3.Leftdifference of the expected normalized transition probabilities for the true lag and the maximum
over all other lags for|S|= 10.Right:the estimator in Eq. 3 matches MLE for largeβ.
5.4.Generalizations and special cases
Single-head transformers.The construction above allows the model to store all the past transition
probabilities in the embedding of the current token by scaling the number of heads with the total number
of lagsK. Since all heads perform the same operation, reducing the number of heads implements an
equivalent algorithm but withworse sample complexity, as some past transitions are discarded. Thus, a
3-layer single-head transformer still solves the task by implementing the algorithm in Proposition 1, but
it only uses T− ˆk−1
K + 1samples to estimate the correct lag.
Non-contiguous lags.In App. G, we provide examples of constructions to handle non-contiguous lags,
where the core approach remains similar to that in Sec. 5.1. Depending on the specific case, the number
of heads needed ranges between the number of lags andˆk−min(K) + 1.
T wo lags.By the construction in Sec. 5.1, handling two contiguous lags requires two attention heads
in the second layer for optimal sample complexity. However, we provide in App. H an alternative
construction for the third layer which enables a single-head model to match the performance of the
two-head model for any two lags, whether contiguous or not (see empirical results below).
6.Experiments and Discussion
We conduct a series of experiments to empirically validate our construction and determine whether
transformers trained via gradient descent learn it.
Setup.We train3-layer disentangled transformers ( ˜T) and3-layer standard transformers (T) with
learned positional and semantic embeddings both withα=
p
dQK using cross-entropy loss. At each