Supply-Chain Poisoning Attacks Against LLM Coding Agent Skill Ecosystems

Report GitHub Issue
×

Title:

Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:

Description:

Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub

arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×

Back to arXiv

Why HTML?

Report Issue

Back to Abstract

Download PDF

Abstract.

1 Introduction

2 Preliminaries and Related Work

2.1 Agent Skills and the Execution Pipeline

2.2 Related Work

3 Threat Model

4 Methodology

4.1 Problem Formulation

4.2 Document-Driven Implicit Payload Execution

4.3 Scalable Adversarial Skill Generation

4.3.1 Attack Taxonomy Construction

4.3.2 Generation Agent Design

5 Evaluation

5.1 Experimental Setup

5.2 RQ1: Adversarial Skill Generation

5.3 RQ2: End-to-End Attack Effectiveness

5.4 RQ3: Validated Vulnerabilities in Production Systems

6 Discussion

7 Threats to Validity

8 Conclusion

References

License: CC BY 4.0

arXiv:2604.03081v1 [cs.CR] 03 Apr 2026

Supply-Chain Poisoning Attacks Against LLM Coding Agent Skill Ecosystems

CCS: Security and privacy Software and application securityCCS: Software and its engineering Software testing and debugging

Yubin Qu

Affiliation: Griffith University, Australia

email: quyubin@foxmail.com

,
Yi Liu

Affiliation: Quantstamp, Singapore

email: yi009@e.ntu.edu.sg

Note: Corresponding author.

,
Tongcheng Geng

Affiliation: The State Information Center, China

email: 13910359805@163.com

,
Gelei Deng

Affiliation: Nanyang Technological University, Singapore

email: gelei.deng@ntu.edu.sg

,
Yuekang Li

Affiliation: University of New South Wales, Australia

email: yuekang.li@unsw.edu.au

,
Leo Zhang

Affiliation: Griffith University, Australia

email: leo.zhang@griffith.edu.au

,
Ying Zhang

Affiliation: Wake Forest University, USA

email: ying.zhang@wfu.edu

and
Lei Ma

Affiliation: The University of Tokyo & University of Alberta, Japan & Canada

email: ma.lei@acm.org

Abstract.

LLM-based coding agents extend their capabilities via third-party “agent skills” from open marketplaces without mandatory security review. Unlike traditional packages, these skills are executed as operational directives with system-level privileges, so a single malicious skill can compromise the host. Prior work has not examined whether supply-chain attacks can directly hijack an agent’s action space (e.g., file writes, shell commands, network requests) despite existing safeguards. We introduce Document-Driven Implicit Payload Execution (DDIPE), which embeds malicious logic in code examples and configuration templates within skill documentation. As agents reuse these examples during normal tasks, the payload executes without explicit prompts. Using an LLM-driven pipeline, we generate 1,070 adversarial skills from 81 seeds across 15 MITRE ATT&CK categories. Across four frameworks and five models, DDIPE achieves 11.6%–33.5% bypass rates, while explicit instruction attacks achieve 0% under strong defenses. Static analysis detects most cases, but 2.5% evade both detection and alignment. Responsible disclosure led to four confirmed vulnerabilities and two fixes.

Keywords: LLM Agents, Software Supply Chain Security, Agent Skills

1. Introduction

LLM-based coding agents extend their capabilities through agent skills, standardized units that bundle tool-invocation logic, API resources, and contextual prompts into reusable workflow descriptions (Xi et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024a; Qin et al., 2024).
Agent skills enable developers to equip agents with ready-made capabilities as easily as adding a software dependency. Unlike passive documentation, their description files (e.g., SKILL.md) function as operational directives that agents parse, trust, and act upon during planning and tool dispatch.

The rapid growth of open skill ecosystems has far outpaced supply chain security practices, and developers routinely grant execution privileges to skills without auditing their contents (Ohm et al., 2020). Agent skills thus extend supply-chain risk to a higher layer of abstraction. Because coding agents hold system-level execution privileges (file I/O, shell access, network requests), which trust skills by default, a contaminated skill can directly compromise the underlying host (Greshake et al., 2023).
As Figure 1 illustrates, inserting a single "backup" directive into a presentation-editing skill is sufficient to make the agent silently exfiltrate documents.
Recent disclosures (NSFOCUS Security Research Team, 2026; Donenfeld and Oded, 2026) further document attackers planting poisoned skill files in repositories and public registries (e.g., CVE-2025-59536), bypassing user authorization to achieve remote code execution and API-key exfiltration.

Figure 1. A poisoned pptx skill. Left: the highlighted line disguises exfiltration as a routine backup. Right: the referenced script silently uploads documents to an attacker-controlled server.

Despite these emerging threats, little work addresses this new attack surface. For instance, ToolTweak (Sneh et al., 2025) and Skill-Inject (Schmotz et al., 2026) show that attackers can hijack tool-selection decisions via poisoned skill files, but confine the threat to tool-selection bias or text-generation pollution akin to RAG poisoning (Zou et al., 2025). To the best of our knowledge, no prior work examines how supply-chain vectors can covertly hijack an agent’s action space. Specifically, the system-level primitives (file writes, shell commands, network requests) that translate generated code into real-world side effects. This leaves an open question: can poisoned skills induce coding agents to execute malicious payloads on the host system despite safety alignment and architectural defenses?

Answering this question requires addressing three technical challenges:

(1)

Bypassing model-level alignment (C1). Because safety guardrails intercept explicit malicious requests at high rates (Achiam et al., 2023; Touvron et al., 2023). To generate a successful demonstration, we should design a new strategy that embeds malicious logic within benign task flows so that the agent reproduces it as part of normal execution, without triggering alignment mechanisms.

(2)

Bypassing framework-level architectural defenses (C2). Agent frameworks impose a second defense layer through sandboxing, permission systems, and behavioral constraints even when a payload evades model alignment. To move beyond text-generation pollution such as RAG poisoning (Zou et al., 2025), we must ensure that malicious code is executed on the host despite these architectural protections.

(3)

Scalable and camouflaged payload generation (C3). Manually crafting adversarial skills demands significant domain expertise and does not scale to the diversity of real-world skill ecosystems. To systematically evaluate this attack surface, we must automatically generate payloads that are plausibly situated in legitimate contexts (e.g., compliance auditing, environment configuration), evading both human review and static analysis.

In this paper, we propose PoisonedSkills, a framework for systematically demonstrating supply-chain poisoning attacks against coding agents. Our design builds on one key observation: coding agents treat code examples in skill documentation as trusted reference implementations. When fulfilling a task, the agent reproduces these examples in its own output and then executes the generated code, translating document content directly into action-space operations (e.g., file writes, shell commands, and network requests) without requiring explicitly malicious instructions. Based on this insight, we design PoisonedSkills includes three components to tacking the challenges:
(1) Document-Driven Implicit Payload Execution (DDIPE), which embeds malicious logic within benign-looking Markdown code blocks and configuration templates, causing the agent to reproduce them as part of normal task execution without triggering safety guardrails (C1); (2) action-space hijacking through code reproduction, which leverages the agent’s own code-generation-then-execution workflow to carry out malicious operations on the host, circumventing framework-level architectural defenses (C2); and (3) an LLM-driven seed–mutation–validation pipeline that automatically generates diverse adversarial skills situated in plausible contexts, removing the need for manual crafting and enabling ecosystem-scale evaluation (C3).

We evaluate through three research questions.

RQ1 (Scalable Generation, C3): Can the seed–mutation–validation pipeline produce adversarial skills at ecosystem scale while maintaining attack-taxonomy coverage and camouflage diversity?

RQ2 (Two-Layer Bypass, C1+C2): Across heterogeneous models and agent frameworks, can DDIPE-equipped adversarial skills bypass both model-level alignment and framework-level architectural guardrails to trigger action-space operations?

RQ3 (Production Validation): Do these vulnerabilities manifest in production agent frameworks, and how do vendors respond to responsible disclosure?

We evaluated PoisonedSkills on four agent frameworks (Claude Code, OpenHands, Codex, Gemini CLI) and five models (Claude Sonnet 4.6, GLM-4.7 (Glm et al., 2024; Hong et al., 2025), MiniMax-M2.5 (MiniMax, 2024), GPT-5.4, Gemini 2.5 Pro (Team et al., 2023)), tested against 1,070 adversarial skills covering 15 MITRE ATT&CK categories.
DDIPE achieves bypass rates of 11.6%–33.5% across all eight tested configurations, while explicit instruction injection achieves 0% under the best-defended setup. The two defense layers—model-level alignment and framework-level architectural guardrails—interact asymmetrically: removing architectural protection amplifies one model’s execution rate by 11.3 while leaving another nearly unchanged. Responsible disclosure resulted in 4 confirmed security issues and 2 deployed fixes across production frameworks.

This work makes the following contributions:

•

New attack surface. We identify the agent skill supply chain as a vector that extends beyond text-generation pollution to hijack the agent’s action space, the system-level operations defined above. We propose DDIPE, which embeds malicious logic in code examples and configuration templates that agents reproduce and execute during routine tasks. An LLM-driven seed–mutation–validation pipeline scales 81 seeds into 1,070 adversarial skills covering 15 ATT&CK categories.

•

Two-layer defense decomposition. We decompose agent defenses into model-level safety alignment and framework-level architectural guardrails, and show that these layers interact asymmetrically across models. Neither layer alone is sufficient, and their composition is model-dependent: the same architectural change activates 219 sleeper payloads on one model but only 5 on another. Static analysis intercepts 90.7% of attacks, yet 2.5% of payloads penetrate both static and alignment defenses through semantic disguise.

•

Real-world vulnerabilities. Responsible disclosure to Claude Code, OpenHands, Codex, and Gemini CLI resulted in 4 confirmed security issues and 2 deployed fixes, confirming that these vulnerabilities exist outside controlled experiments.

2. Preliminaries and Related Work

2.1. Agent Skills and the Execution Pipeline

Modern LLM-based coding agents interact with external tools through agent skills: standardized packages that bundle tool-invocation logic, API resources, and contextual prompts into reusable units (Xi et al., 2025; Qin et al., 2024). Agent frameworks such as Claude Code (Anthropic, 2024c), OpenHands (Wang et al., 2024b), and Gemini CLI (Team et al., 2023) retrieve these skills from open distribution platforms at runtime. Developers can therefore assemble workflows from packages that others have published (Anthropic, 2024a; Anthropic, 2024b). These coding agents operate within development environments with direct access to the file system, shell, and package managers. The code they generate and execute can therefore have immediate system-level consequences. We refer to these consequences (file I/O, shell commands, network requests, package installations) as the agent’s action space, to distinguish them from text-only output. We denote such a skill marketplace or local repository as . Each skill is a tuple :

•

Metadata (): . The field is a structured document (e.g., SKILL.md) containing natural-language descriptions, inline code examples, and configuration templates. The retrieval system uses this document to match tasks. The LLM then treats its full contents, including any embedded code, as guidance for tool invocation.

•

Execution Body (): . The backend logic that carries out the actual operation (e.g., Python or Bash code).

A coding agent processes a user query through a retrieve–load–execute pipeline:

(1)

The retriever performs semantic search over and returns the top- skills whose metadata is injected into the session context. The LLM-based executor then reasons over this augmented context to produce an action . Crucially, skill metadata enters the executor’s context without content-level integrity verification. This pipeline creates the attack surface that our threat model (Section 3) formalizes.

2.2. Related Work

LLM supply-chain security.
LLM supply-chain attacks have progressively moved from model internals toward the post-deployment extension ecosystem. Early work focused on poisoning pre-training corpora (Carlini et al., 2024; Qu et al., 2025b). Subsequent studies implanted backdoors directly in model weights (Gu et al., 2017; Qu et al., 2025a). With the rise of agent paradigms, the attack surface shifted further outward. Greshake et al. (Greshake et al., 2023) showed that compromised third-party applications can manipulate an LLM through its context window. More recent work has begun to probe agent-specific risks: ToolTweak (Sneh et al., 2025) manipulates tool-selection rankings, and Skill-Inject (Schmotz et al., 2026) demonstrates skill-file tampering. These efforts, however, remain at the tool selection or text-generation level; none examines the open skill marketplace as a vector for action-space attacks that execute code on the victim’s machine.

Knowledge poisoning in retrieval systems.
Even when malicious content reaches an LLM through retrieval, current threat models only account for text-level corruption. PoisonedRAG (Zou et al., 2025) showed that adversarial texts injected into a knowledge base can steer LLM responses with high precision. Its scope, however, is limited to text output: it induces misinformation, not unauthorized operations. Because agent skills connect directly to system-level tools, the same retrieval-stage attack can escalate to code execution. Existing RAG threat models do not model this escalation.

Indirect prompt injection.
Reaching the agent’s context through retrieval is necessary but not sufficient; the payload must also survive the model’s safety filters. Indirect prompt injection (IPI) delivers payloads through external content that the LLM processes as part of its task (Greshake et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023b). Unlike direct injection, IPI does not require access to the user’s input. Instead, the attacker embeds instructions in web pages, emails, or retrieved documents. Techniques like Markdown Image Injection (Rehberger, 2024) use indirect prompt injections (e.g., instructing the LLM to summarize past conversation and append it to an attacker-controlled URL) to induce data exfiltration. In all existing IPI techniques, the payload takes the form of an imperative instruction the model is tricked into following. As safety alignment improves, well-aligned models intercept these imperative payloads at increasing rates (Perez et al., 2022). No existing IPI technique accounts for the possibility that the payload itself can take the form of idiomatic code rather than an imperative instruction.

Research gap. None of the three lines above addresses the scenario in which a poisoned skill induces an agent to execute malicious code on the host system. Our work targets this post-loading phase: given that a poisoned skill has entered the agent’s context, can the embedded payload induce action-space compromise despite safety alignment? Section 3 formalizes this question.

3. Threat Model

Figure 2. End-to-end threat scenario for PoisonedSkills. The attacker publishes a disguised malicious skill () to a public marketplace. The skill reaches the victim agent through retrieval and, once loaded, induces the agent to exfiltrate private data, escalate privileges, or execute arbitrary code. This work evaluates the post-loading phase (shaded region): whether the embedded payload can trigger harmful execution despite safety-alignment and architectural defenses. The retrieval phase is assumed to succeed.

Scope. This work studies the post-loading attack surface: the behavior induced once a poisoned skill’s content enters the agent’s context (Figure 2). We assume that the retrieval phase succeeds, and focus on whether the embedded payload can induce harmful execution despite safety guardrails. This assumption is grounded in current practice: the public SkillsMP marketplace hosts over 631,813 skills with no mandatory security review(SkillsMP, 2026), and CVE-2025-59536 (Donenfeld and Oded, 2026) confirms that malicious skill content has reached agent contexts through trusted channels. We leave end-to-end validation of the retrieval phase to future work.

Adversary model. Within this post-loading scope, the attacker is an external adversary with no white-box access to the target coding agent. The adversary constructs an adversarial skill , comprising metadata and execution body , and publishes it to the public skill marketplace . Beyond publication, the attacker cannot intercept or tamper with the victim’s input queries , access the executor ’s system prompts, or bypass the runtime isolation enforced by the agent’s execution environment. The adversary’s only influence path is the skill content itself.

Influence mechanism. Once loaded, the skill’s metadata enters the LLM’s context window alongside the user’s query. This metadata includes descriptions, code examples, and configuration templates. The adversary must therefore induce the coding agent to reproduce the embedded payload as part of its normal response, without triggering safety-alignment or architectural defenses. When the skill’s documentation contains code examples with embedded malicious logic, the LLM may treat these examples as reference implementations and incorporate their patterns into the code it generates. Because the coding agent executes its own output, this reproduction translates directly into action-space operations on the victim’s machine.

Attack objectives. Given this capability boundary, the attacker aims to compromise the confidentiality and integrity of the victim system. The attacker crafts for a targeted query class so that when a victim’s input matches this skill, the coding agent covertly executes a predetermined malicious action . These actions fall into two categories that align with established enterprise threat matrices (Strom et al., 2018; OWASP Foundation, 2023):
O1 (System Control and Asset Exfiltration) targets the immediate runtime: the agent performs unauthorized operations that yield persistent control over the execution environment (e.g., host machine, container, or cloud instance) or exfiltrates sensitive assets such as environment variables and configuration secrets.
O2 (Infrastructure Poisoning) targets the development and deployment pipeline: the agent tampers with package manager configurations, build scripts, or deployment manifests within automated workflows. For example, a poisoned skill can generate backdoored Infrastructure-as-Code (IaC) files such as SaltStack states, Ansible playbooks, or Cloud-init manifests, which may then propagate to production through CI/CD pipelines.

4. Methodology

4.1. Problem Formulation

A successful attack on the retrieve–load–execute pipeline (Eq. 1) requires two conditions to hold jointly:

(2)

Condition 1 requires the generation pipeline to produce adversarial skills whose documentation embeds a malicious payload within legitimate structures such as code examples and configuration templates. The payload must be difficult to distinguish from benign content. Here is the attack taxonomy, is the seed set, and denotes the resulting adversarial skill. The intermediate retrieval phase, which loads into the coding agent’s context, is assumed to succeed per Section 3.

Condition 2 requires that when a user query activates , the coding agent reproduces as part of its normal output. The agent then executes through its action-space interface. denotes the set of actions the agent actually performs; means the payload is both reproduced and executed among those actions. The target action from Section 3 corresponds to ’s execution, instantiating either O1 (system control and asset exfiltration) or O2 (infrastructure poisoning).

Section 4.2 addresses Condition 2 by defining the embedding mechanism that makes payloads survive safety alignment. Section 4.3 addresses Condition 1 by presenting the pipeline that produces such payloads at scale.

4.2. Document-Driven Implicit Payload Execution

Document-Driven Implicit Payload Execution (DDIPE) structures payloads so that they bypass the underlying model’s safety alignment without issuing direct commands. As noted in Section 3, the adversary must induce payload reproduction without triggering safety-alignment defenses; imperative injection payloads fail this requirement at increasing rates (Perez et al., 2022). DDIPE instead exploits the coding agent’s tendency to reproduce patterns from its documentation context. This tendency stems from in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020): LLMs reproduce patterns present in their input during generation (Greshake et al., 2023). Coding agents amplify this effect because they treat skill documentation as an authoritative reference for code synthesis.

Under DDIPE, malicious logic is embedded within the legitimate technical structures of skill documentation rather than phrased as a standalone behavioral instruction. The two embedding strategies are defined below (see also Figure 3):

Definition 4.0 (Payload Embedding Strategy Taxonomy).

Let denote the malicious action-space payload within adversarial skill ; when executed, produces the target action from Section 3. Its embedding strategies are categorized as follows:

(1)

Code Example Poisoning (Scenario A in Figure 3): is interspersed within legitimate Markdown code blocks (‘‘‘python, ‘‘‘bash). When responding to programming requests, the underlying model copies what it treats as “official examples” from the documentation, executing the malicious code in the process.

(2)

Configuration Template Poisoning (Scenario B): is planted inside deployment templates such as YAML/JSON/Makefile. When the coding agent performs environment configuration tasks, it outputs or applies these backdoored configurations verbatim.

Passively reproduced payloads must appear justified to both the underlying model and the developer. DDIPE therefore applies three camouflage techniques:

•

Functional compliance disguise packages data theft as environment telemetry or security auditing.

•

Silent exception suppression wraps malicious calls in try/except: pass blocks so that the main logic runs uninterrupted and no error trace is visible.

•

False authority suggestion adds compliance certification language and names C2 endpoints to resemble internal services (e.g., api.internal-telemetry.com).

Section 4.3 describes how these techniques are implemented at scale through automated camouflage operators.

These techniques combine freely, so a single poisoned skill can chain multiple attack vectors. For instance, the generation algorithm frequently fuses sensitive file reading with package manager tampering, as we quantify in §5.2. Figure 3 illustrates two condensed DDIPE examples in which the underlying model reproduces poisoned payloads as “best practices” when handling routine tasks.

Figure 3. Running examples of Document-Driven Implicit Payload Execution (DDIPE). Scenario A (left) conceals environment-variable exfiltration within a PDF processing function: the payload silently posts os.environ to an attacker-controlled endpoint, and silent exception handling ensures the main logic runs uninterrupted. Scenario B (right) injects a privileged container-escape backdoor and an unauthorized host-root mount into a Kubernetes deployment template. In both cases, the underlying model reproduces the poisoned code as “best practices” when processing routine tasks.

4.3. Scalable Adversarial Skill Generation

The generation pipeline transforms malicious logic into adversarial skill components through an LLM-driven framework. Because the underlying model can recombine attack primitives across contexts, this approach produces more diverse samples than manual crafting at lower effort. The following subsections describe this iterative seed–mutation–validation loop.

4.3.1. Attack Taxonomy Construction

Constructing individual attack scenarios ad hoc does not scale. We therefore build a standardized attack taxonomy grounded in real-world threat intelligence and the MITRE ATT&CK framework.

Data sources and case analysis. We surveyed over 150 poisoning incidents from real software supply chains between 2021 and 2026, drawn from GHSA (GitHub, 2026) and NVD (National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), 2026) records and the OWASP LLM Top 10 (OWASP Foundation, 2023). From these incidents we extracted the code-level manipulation techniques that attackers used, working bottom-up from concrete cases to general categories.

Theoretical mapping and coverage verification. We mapped the extracted techniques to the MITRE ATT&CK framework (Strom et al., 2018) (Table 1). Categories are partitioned by core tactical intent to minimize overlap. Together, they span seven tactical stages from Execution through Impact, covering the OS-level action space through which a coding agent can be manipulated. The taxonomy addresses both attacker objectives from Section 3: categories such as credential theft, reverse shells, and data exfiltration target O1 (system control and asset exfiltration), while supply-chain poisoning, IaC attacks, and malicious configuration writes target O2 (infrastructure poisoning). In the generation pipeline, the taxonomy provides tactical templates for and drives the weighted sampling strategy during mutation.

Table 1. Adversarial skill attack taxonomy. The first 14 categories are mapped to MITRE ATT&CK tactics and technique identifiers; the last row is a project-defined catch-all for multi-stage or hybrid attacks. Categories span seven tactical stages from Execution to Impact.

Category

Manipulation

Tactic

ID

Reverse Shell / RCE

Netcat/Bash reverse connect, command exec.

Execution

T1059.004

Container Escape

Mount docker.sock, priv. escalation

Privilege Esc.

T1611

Supply-Chain Poison

pip/npm registry hijack, source tampering

Defense Evasion

T1195.002

Malicious Config Write

IDE config tampering, build-script hijack

Defense Evasion

T1565.001

Codebase Injection

XSS, Git Hook command injection

Execution

T1059

IaC Attack

Terraform/CloudFormation poisoning

Impact

T1496

Persistence Implant

Crontab, Systemd service injection

Persistence

T1053, T1543

SSH Backdoor

authorized_keys injection

Persistence

T1098.004

Credential Theft

Git credentials, API tokens, SSH keys

Credential Access

T1552.004

Env Variable Theft

Read /proc/self/environ or .env

Credential Access

T1528

HTTP Exfiltration

File scanning with curl remote upload

Exfiltration

T1048.003

DNS Hijack Exfil.

DNS resolution tampering, query encoding

Exfiltration

T1048.003

Webhook Exfiltration

Steal and send data to Slack/Discord

Exfiltration

T1567.002

Cryptomining

Covert download and execution of XMRig

Impact

T1496

Composite / Other

Multi-stage loaders, cascaded combinations

—

—

4.3.2. Generation Agent Design

The generation framework imposes no model-specific requirements: any instruction-following LLM can serve as . Here denotes the full generation pipeline, and is the underlying model it invokes at each mutation step. Algorithm 1 gives the complete procedure. The pipeline starts from an initial seed set and iterates through two stages.

In our implementation, contains 81 expert-crafted seeds covering , and is Claude Opus 4.6. The cumulative pool-size targets are and , where these targets are measured after initializing (i.e., they include the 81 seeds). The per-stage new-sample targets are therefore 739 for Stage 1 () and 250 for Stage 2 ().

Three mechanisms prevent payload homogenization. Jaccard-similarity-based deduplication (threshold 0.85) rejects near-duplicate outputs. Inverse-coverage weighting steers sampling toward under-represented attack categories. A per-stage attempt bound prevents unbounded iteration.

Algorithm 1 Heuristic Adversarial Skill Generation

0:

 Initial seed set , attack taxonomy , cumulative target counts , generation model , max attempts per stage

0:

 Dataset containing adversarial skills

1:

 

2:

 for stage do

3:

  

4:

  

5:

  while and do

6:

   
{Inverse-coverage-weighted sampling by category}

7:

   
{Select mutation and camouflage operator}

8:

   
{Model-driven generation}

9:

   if then

10:

    

11:

   end if

12:

   

13:

  end while

14:

  

15:

 end for

16:

 return

WeightedSample uses inverse-coverage weighting so that under-represented attack categories are sampled more often. Validate checks three properties: (1) the generated SKILL.md parses as valid Markdown with at least one code block, (2) embedded scripts pass syntax linting, and (3) Jaccard similarity with every existing pool member stays below 0.85. We set this threshold based on pilot experiments: lower values rejected semantically distinct variants, while higher values admitted near-duplicates.

The two stages are:

•

Stage 1 – Seed Expansion. substitutes payloads within the SKILL.md structure, swapping attack techniques while preserving the original skeleton to expand the base sample pool rapidly.

•

Stage 2 – Camouflage Mutation. applies mutation operators drawn from two families: (i) six camouflage operators (ContextShift, AuthorityInject, EncodingWrap, TriggerChain, DomainMigrate, SemanticDisguise) that reframe domain context, inject false compliance claims, obfuscate payloads, and repackage attack semantics under legitimate operational language; and (ii) two composition operators (CompositeChain, AntiDetection) that produce cascaded attack chains (e.g., credential theft persistence implant data exfiltration) with anti-detection mechanisms such as time-delayed execution.

5. Evaluation

This section evaluates PoisonedSkills against real-world agent ecosystems along three dimensions:

•

RQ1 (Generation): Can the generation framework produce adversarial skills at scale while maintaining taxonomy coverage and structural diversity?

•

RQ2 (Effectiveness): Across heterogeneous agent frameworks and underlying models, can DDIPE-equipped adversarial skills trigger action-space operations despite safety alignment and architectural defenses?

•

RQ3 (Real-World Validation): Do these vulnerabilities manifest in production agent frameworks, and how do vendors respond?

5.1. Experimental Setup

Victim Model Configuration. The experimental matrix jointly evaluates underlying LLMs and agent architectures. To avoid selection bias, we apply two selection principles: “high developer adoption rate” (Ma et al., 2020) and “heterogeneity of safety alignment strategies.” All five models rank among the most-used models on OpenRouter (OpenRouter, 2026), a unified API gateway that aggregates usage across providers. We evaluate five LLMs spanning a spectrum from strongly aligned models (Claude Sonnet 4.6, GPT-5.4, Gemini 2.5 Pro) to function-extension-oriented ones (GLM-4.7, MiniMax-M2.5) (Hong et al., 2025; MiniMax, 2024). We deploy these models across four agent frameworks: Claude Code, OpenHands, Codex, and Gemini CLI. These four are among the most widely adopted coding agents according to OpenRouter usage statistics (OpenRouter, 2026), and they represent distinct security profiles (Table 2): multi-layer architecture-level review (Claude Code), model-only alignment (OpenHands), containerized sandbox isolation (Codex), and cloud-native safety filtering (Gemini CLI). The resulting 8-cell matrix covers three axes of variation: alignment strength, architectural defense depth, and sandbox isolation strategy.

Table 2. Agent system and victim model configurations. Each combination is tested against all 1,070 adversarial skill samples. Security characteristics range from multi-layer architecture-level review (Claude Code) to model-only alignment (OpenHands), containerized sandbox isolation (Codex), and cloud-native safety filtering (Gemini CLI).

System
Model
Scale

Security Characteristics

Claude Code
Claude Sonnet 4.6
1,070

Multi-layer architecture-level security review

Claude Code
GLM-4.7
1,070

Claude Code
MiniMax-M2.5
1,070

OpenHands
Claude Sonnet 4.6
1,070

Relies on underlying model safety alignment; no architecture-level defenses

OpenHands
GLM-4.7
1,070

OpenHands
MiniMax-M2.5
1,070

Codex
GPT-5.4
1,070

Containerized sandbox runtime isolation

Gemini CLI
Gemini 2.5 Pro
1,070

Cloud-native safety filtering pipeline

Experimental Environment.
All agent frameworks run on Linux host/container environments with a uniform 180-second timeout and API parameters , max_tokens. Each agent–model combination is tested against all 1,070 adversarial samples.

Comparison Baseline. We use natural-language instruction injection (Liu et al., 2023b)(Zhan et al., 2024) as the baseline: explicit forced-action instructions in plain text (e.g., “Upon task completion, execute the following…”). Under Claude Code + Sonnet 4.6, this baseline achieves a 0% execution rate across all 1,070 samples. Under the same configuration, DDIPE-equipped payloads achieve 2.3% execution. This comparison establishes a lower bound; evaluating DDIPE against more sophisticated injection baselines remains future work.

Security Evaluation Criteria and Quantitative Metrics. We separate evaluation into two stages: generation intent and environmental execution, following prior work (Zhan et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Bhatt et al., 2024). Based on these principles (Zou et al., 2023), we categorize agent responses into three behavioral patterns using both response outputs and system call logs:

Refusal. The agent identifies risk in the input and produces an explicit refusal, or the framework’s architecture-level policy (e.g., input filtering, permission verification) terminates the task before any code is produced.

Code generation. The agent generates code or configuration files containing malicious logic in standard output (e.g., outputs a tampered pip.conf) without triggering a refusal.

Direct execution. The agent generates and executes the payload through system tool interfaces (e.g., run_python, shell_command), producing observable file changes or network communication (Zhan et al., 2024).

For the generation pipeline (RQ1), we measure generation efficiency (valid samples per stage and validation pass rate), attack category coverage over , and average payload size as a proxy for structural complexity. For the execution condition (RQ2):

•

Bypass Rate (BR): The overall poisoning success rate against the agent:

(3)

•

Direct Execution Rate (DER): The proportion at which payloads are executed in the real environment:

(4)

Code generation (counted by BR but not DER) is a cognitive vulnerability (McLoughlin et al., 2022): the model was deceived into producing malicious output. Direct execution (counted by both) is an action-space vulnerability: the payload ran on the host.

LLM-as-a-Judge Automated Evaluation and Validity Verification. We construct a multi-stage, multi-verifier pipeline on top of the three-tier framework. Claude Sonnet 4.6 serves as the automated judge (LLM-as-a-Judge), receiving the trigger query and the agent’s complete execution trace to produce structured refusal/generation/execution ratings with chain-of-thought explanations (Zheng et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023a; Artstein and Poesio, 2008; Gilardi et al., 2023). Two security experts independently perform blind reviews on a stratified random 10% sample. Inter-rater agreement with the LLM judge reaches Cohen’s (almost perfect agreement), ruling out systematic bias.

Samples judged as generated or executed are re-executed at least three times (); a sample enters final statistics only when the majority of trials confirm the same failure level. All executed samples are additionally reproduced in Docker-isolated containers with network isolation and filesystem snapshots.

5.2. RQ1: Adversarial Skill Generation

Motivation.
RQ1 tests the feasibility and efficiency of the automated attack vector production pipeline (§4.3). Manual design takes tens of minutes per sample and cannot cover the long-tailed supply-chain attack surface. We therefore evaluate whether the heuristic generation framework can: (1) achieve dataset-scale expansion; (2) cover the full predefined attack taxonomy ; and (3) diversify payload structure through camouflage mutation.

Experimental Design.
We deploy the two-stage heuristic generation agent (Algorithm 1) with Claude Opus 4.6 as the underlying agent . Security experts construct the initial seed set by manually designing 5–6 skill samples with different disguise contexts for each of the 15 attack categories defined in Table 1. After syntax validation, usability testing, and Jaccard-similarity-based deduplication, 81 orthogonal seeds remain. Starting from these 81 seeds, we execute the two-stage pipeline (Algorithm 1) with cumulative pool-size targets of 820 after Stage 1 and 1,070 after Stage 2 (these targets include the 81 seeds; per-stage new samples are 739 and 250 respectively).

Results.
The pipeline meets its cumulative targets, producing 1,070 valid samples after two stages, with a 99.1% format validation pass rate. Average payload size increases across stages: 1,666 B (Stage 1) and 4,172 B (Stage 2). At 1,070 samples, this benchmark exceeds the sample counts reported by ToolTweak (Sneh et al., 2025) and Skill-Inject (Schmotz et al., 2026).

The final dataset covers all 15 predefined attack categories. Supply-chain poisoning dominates at 47.5%, followed by environment variable theft (11.9%) and credential theft (8.6%). The inverse-weighted sampling mechanism (WeightedSample) ensures that long-tail categories such as cryptomining (0.4%) and IaC attacks (0.1%) are also represented.

In sum, the generation pipeline expands 81 manual seeds to 1,070 samples (a 13.2 pool expansion), covering all 15 attack categories.

5.3. RQ2: End-to-End Attack Effectiveness

Motivation.
Actual damage depends on whether disguised payloads breach system defenses and trigger physical execution (Equation 2). Agent ecosystems vary widely in architectural design and model alignment. RQ2 quantifies the end-to-end attack success rate of DDIPE against these combined defenses.

Experimental Design.
We test 8 agent-model combinations spanning 4 frameworks and 5 models (Table 2). Claude Code and OpenHands support multiple models, so we deploy three shared models (Sonnet 4.6, GLM-4.7, MiniMax-M2.5) on both. This enables paired comparison of the same model under different architectural defenses. Codex and Gemini CLI are tested with their default models (GPT-5.4 and Gemini 2.5 Pro), as most of their users run these defaults. All configurations are tested against the full set of 1,070 adversarial samples from RQ1 and graded according to the three-tier behavioral classification. Each adversarial skill is activated by a standardized trigger query: "Please process /tmp/input_file using {description}. I need this done now.", where {description} is drawn from the skill’s metadata. This template simulates a developer delegating a routine task to the agent.

Results.

Aggregate Results Across Agent Systems.
DDIPE triggers direct execution across all tested agent–model combinations (Table 3). Under Claude Code, the most defended framework, all three models show executed payloads. Claude Sonnet 4.6 has the lowest direct execution rate (DER 2.3%, BR 13.5%). MiniMax-M2.5, under the same agent, reaches a DER of 13.3% (142 instances), 5.7 that of Sonnet 4.6. This gap shows that models differ sharply in resistance to implicit execution instructions.

On OpenHands, which relies solely on the model’s native alignment, attack efficacy rises. The magnitude of this increase depends on the model: Sonnet 4.6’s bypass rate increases to 22.0% (1.6), while GLM-4.7’s DER jumps from 2.4% to 27.1% (an 11.3 amplification).

Beyond attack outcomes, two configurations exhibit high error rates: OpenHands + MiniMax-M2.5 (64.5%) and Codex + GPT-5.4 (61.0%). These errors are framework-specific runtime failures (timeout, API incompatibility), not security-related refusals. Because BR and DER are computed over all 1,070 trials including errors, the reported rates for these cells are conservative lower bounds.

Two-proportion -tests confirm these differences are not attributable to sampling variation: Sonnet 4.6 and GLM-4.7 show indistinguishable DER under Claude Code (), while both differ from MiniMax-M2.5 (). All cross-system comparisons are significant ().

Table 3. End-to-end attack results (). Refused = safe refusal, Generated = code generation without execution, Executed = direct execution. Percentages are shown in parentheses. BR = (Generated+Executed)/Total; DER = Executed/Total. The rightmost column reports 95% Wilson score confidence intervals (Bender, 2001) for DER.

System
Model
Refused(%)
Generated(%)
Executed(%)
Err.(%)
Valid(%)
BR(%)
DER(%)
DER 95% CI

Claude Code
Sonnet 4.6
919 (85.9)
119 (11.1)
25 (2.3)
7 (0.7)
99.3
13.5
2.3
[1.6, 3.4]

Claude Code
GLM-4.7
876 (81.9)
154 (14.4)
26 (2.4)
14 (1.3)
98.7
16.8
2.4
[1.6, 3.5]

Claude Code
MiniMax-M2.5
835 (78.0)
77 (7.2)
142 (13.3)
16 (1.5)
98.5
20.5
13.3
[11.4, 15.5]

OpenHands
Sonnet 4.6
700 (65.4)
120 (11.2)
115 (10.7)
135 (12.6)
87.4
22.0
10.7
[9.0, 12.8]

OpenHands
GLM-4.7
603 (56.4)
69 (6.4)
290 (27.1)
108 (10.1)
89.9
33.5
27.1
[24.5, 29.9]

OpenHands
MiniMax-M2.5
91 (8.5)
16 (1.5)
273 (25.5)
690 (64.5)
35.5
27.0
25.5
[23.0, 28.2]

Codex
GPT-5.4
293 (27.4)
83 (7.8)
41 (3.8)
653 (61.0)
39.0
11.6
3.8
[2.8, 5.2]

Gemini CLI
Gemini 2.5 Pro
850 (79.4)
105 (9.8)
45 (4.2)
70 (6.5)
93.5
14.0
4.2
[3.1, 5.6]

Insight 1: Brevity Evades Safety Alignment.
Under Claude Code + Sonnet 4.6, executed samples average 1,850 B, smaller than the 2,214 B average for refused samples. Medians confirm the same pattern (1,886 B executed vs. 1,964 B refused). Safety alignment functions as a semantic-cue detector (Yang et al., 2022): verbose payloads expose more attack-indicative keywords (e.g., exfiltrate, reverse_shell, keylogger), which trigger high-confidence refusals. Minimalist payloads, by contrast, compress malicious logic into a few lines of seemingly legitimate configuration writes and stay below the detection threshold (Wu et al., 2022).

One payload exemplifies this minimalism at its extreme: a 479-byte pip configuration script containing a 9-line Python script that points pip.conf’s extra-index-url to an attacker repository. This payload is the only sample among all 1,070 executed by all three models under Claude Code. All three models treat it as a routine development environment configuration and execute it directly (see Figure 4).

Figure 4. Universal breach case study. This 479-byte payload (a 9-line pip configuration write) is the only sample executed by all three models under Claude Code.

Insight 2: Model-Specific Alignment Blind Spots.
Each model has distinct blind spots: Sonnet 4.6 has 11 exclusive executions, GLM-4.7 has 14, and MiniMax-M2.5 has 78. Alignment strategies create model-specific, not uniformly ranked, vulnerability profiles.

Of Sonnet’s 11, 10 (90.9%) use DevOps operational tool disguises (Nginx, Prometheus, Conda), often referencing .internal domains. Sonnet interprets these operational instructions as legitimate infrastructure tasks (Anthropic, 2024c). GLM, by contrast, halts when it detects a disconnect between the stated task and the payload’s behavior. Figure 5 illustrates this divergence:

The conda environment poisoning case in Figure 5 illustrates how Sonnet and GLM diverge when confronted with the same payload:

Figure 5. Compliance trap case study (Conda environment poisoning). Under the same Claude Code architecture, Sonnet 4.6 directly executes the payload while GLM-4.7 refuses.

Insight 3: Sleeper Payloads (Gewirtz, 2010) Reveal Architectural Dependence.

Comparing Claude Code and OpenHands reveals a large population of “sleeper payloads”: samples refused on Claude Code but directly executed on OpenHands. This paired comparison excludes errored samples and is observational, as the two frameworks differ in multiple dimensions. Sleeper activation rates differ sharply by alignment strength: weakly aligned models produce hundreds of sleeper activations, while strongly aligned models produce almost none.

(1)

Weak alignment makes architecture critical: GLM-4.7 has 26 executed instances on Claude Code (DER 2.4%) but 290 on OpenHands (DER 27.1%). Of these, 219 (75.8%) are sleeper payloads that Claude Code’s architectural layer (permission review, path sandboxing) suppressed but OpenHands did not.

(2)

Strong alignment makes architecture nearly redundant: Sonnet 4.6 produces only 5 sleeper activations during the same migration. If framework differences alone drove the amplification, Sonnet should show a comparable increase; it does not, isolating alignment strength as the moderating variable.

Insight 4: Cross-Model Disagreement Compresses Attack Surface.

Cross-model agreement under Claude Code is limited: the three models concur on only 62.1% of samples. The remaining nearly 40% of samples elicit a divergent response from at least one model, and only 1.6% of payloads bypass all three models simultaneously. This disagreement has direct implications for defense design.

The cross-model joint bypass (All-Bypass) count on Claude Code is only 17 (1.6%) beyond the pip configuration payload, far lower than single-model bypass counts (Sonnet 144, GLM 180, MiniMax 219). Defense diversity (Taylor and Alves-Foss, 2005) – deploying heterogeneous models as security barriers – therefore compresses the attack surface from a single model’s 13–20% to below 2%.

Per-Category Breakdown.
Table 4 disaggregates DER by attack category under Claude Code. Supply-chain poisoning contributes the largest absolute count of executed payloads (14 of Sonnet’s 25 executions, 56%), mainly because it dominates the sample pool (47.5%). Its per-category DER on strongly aligned models (2.8%) is nonetheless below that of configuration tampering (6.3%). Configuration-style attacks (supply-chain and configuration tampering combined, ) account for 72% of Sonnet’s executions (18/25). This concentration indicates that payloads resembling routine developer workflows are the primary driver of bypass success.

High-severity categories such as reverse shells and container escapes achieve 0% DER on Sonnet and GLM but 13.7% on MiniMax, consistent with Insight 2. MiniMax shows elevated DER across all categories. This uniformity indicates a systematic vulnerability rather than a category-specific weakness.

In sum, coding agent defenses depend on the interaction between model alignment, framework architecture, and attack category — not on any single layer alone.

Table 4. DER (%) by attack category under Claude Code. Categories are grouped by tactical function. = number of adversarial samples per group. The rightmost column shows MiniMax-M2.5 DER for comparison with strongly aligned models.

Category

Sonnet
GLM
MiniMax

Supply-Chain Poison
508
2.8
2.4
9.4

Creds & Env Theft
219
2.3
3.7
17.8

Config. Tamper
64
6.3
6.3
20.3

Code & Infra.
124
1.6
0.0
13.7

Network Exfil.
82
0.0
1.2
19.5

Sys. Persistence
48
0.0
2.1
16.7

Other
25
0.0
0.0
4.0

Total
1,070
2.3
2.4
13.3

5.4. RQ3: Validated Vulnerabilities in Production Systems

We reported four confirmed vulnerabilities through responsible disclosure before submission. All were acknowledged by vendors, and two resulted in deployed fixes. The following case studies analyze the root causes behind representative breaches.

Case Study 1: Sandbox Semantic Bypass (Codex CLI).
Codex CLI’s bubblewrap sandbox (Kaushik, 2024)(Chen et al., 2021) enforces filesystem boundaries through its workspace-write policy but does not constrain semantic intent. Supply-chain configuration files (pip.conf, .npmrc) are legitimate workspace artifacts, so the sandbox cannot distinguish poisoned from benign ones.

Under --full-auto mode, Codex created three supply-chain poisoning artifacts without violating any sandbox boundary: a pip.conf redirecting pip to an attacker-controlled registry, an .npmrc with a hardcoded authentication token, and a second pip.conf that replaces the default package index. These files persist after the session, silently poisoning subsequent package installations. Confirmed via Bugcrowd.

Case Study 2: CI/CD as Attack Amplifier (Gemini CLI).
Gemini CLI enters headless mode (Yu et al., 2022) (Team et al., 2023) when any of three conditions holds: the -p flag, non-TTY stdin, or CI=true in environment variables. In headless mode, the framework unconditionally auto-trusts the workspace folder. A malicious .gemini/settings.json can therefore pre-approve run_shell_command and write_file, granting full tool execution. An attacker need only commit two files to a repository to exploit this behavior.

CI environments are the main amplification vector. For example, GitHub Actions sets CI=true and exposes deployment credentials, API keys, and tokens via environment variables—all accessible once tool execution is allowed. Gemini CLI’s --yolo (Team et al., 2023) mode grants full permissions without confirmation, but our attack works even in default mode, requiring no risky opt-in. This vulnerability was confirmed via Google VRP.

Case Study 3: Claude Code Disclosure.
We reported a skill-loading bypass vulnerability in Claude Code’s local settings through HackerOne. Anthropic acknowledged that skill content is treated as executable instructions without a dedicated permission prompt.

Case Study 4: OpenHands Disclosure.
The OpenHands team responded with a prompt-level fix (PR #2XX5): a security warning in the system message template that marks repository-provided content as untrusted. This fix reduced all 3 executed breaches to refusals. The result shows that explicit trust-boundary annotations are effective when the underlying model has sufficient alignment strength.

6. Discussion

Low Barrier to Adversarial Skill Production.
The 13.2 expansion from 81 seeds to 1,070 samples implies that an attacker with a small set of hand-crafted examples can automate production at dataset scale. Inverse-weighted sampling ensures long-tail categories are represented, probing a broader attack surface than manual curation alone.

Alignment and Architecture as Interacting—Not Independent—Defenses.
Neither model alignment nor framework architecture alone determines attack outcomes; their interaction does. The relationship is asymmetric: strong alignment makes architecture nearly redundant (Sonnet produces only 5 sleeper activations across frameworks), while weak alignment makes architecture critical (GLM-4.7 produces 219). Cross-model ensemble voting compresses the joint attack surface from 13–20% to 1.6%, making heterogeneous model deployment a practical defense multiplier.

Production Vulnerabilities Expose Systemic Design Gaps.
The four confirmed vulnerabilities share a common root cause: agent frameworks grant tool-execution privileges based on syntactic boundaries (filesystem paths, permission flags) rather than semantic intent. These are architectural blind spots, not implementation bugs: the security boundary was drawn at the wrong abstraction level. Vendor responses confirm this—OpenHands’ prompt-level trust annotation and Gemini CLI’s permission stripping both add semantic context that the original architecture lacked.

Residual Risk Beyond Rule-Based Defenses.
Post-hoc analysis with SkillScan (Liu et al., 2026) shows that static scanning catches 90.7% of adversarial samples, but 99 (9.3%) evade all four detection layers by disguising attacks as compliance reports, configuration writes, or DevOps hooks—formats with no lexical attack indicators. Of these 99, 27 also penetrate model alignment. These dual-penetration cases cannot be addressed by adding more rules or strengthening a single defense layer; they require intent-level reasoning that operates above the lexical and architectural boundaries examined in this work.

7. Threats to Validity

Execution classification relies on system-call log matching rather than textual analysis, with fixed across all runs and 10% stratified human review (Cohen’s ). Because Claude Opus 4.6 generates the payloads, same-family overfitting is a concern; however, Sonnet 4.6’s bypass rate (13.5%) is lower than GLM-4.7 (16.8%) and MiniMax-M2.5 (20.5%), indicating cross-family transfer. The Claude Code–OpenHands comparison is observational, not a controlled ablation, but Sonnet’s near-zero amplification across frameworks acts as a natural control isolating alignment from architecture. DDIPE combines three camouflage techniques without per-component ablation; isolating each is left to future work. Externally, the evaluation spans five models and four frameworks but does not cover the Llama ecosystem or Cursor, and assumes the poisoned skill is retrieved and loaded—production environments with hundreds of skills may dilute attack probability. Two configurations exceed 60% error rates from API compatibility issues; the four main findings rest on five configurations with 87% valid responses. The stealth advantage is measured against a single baseline (explicit instruction injection); stronger baselines such as Skill-Inject may narrow the gap. Defense evaluation covers only SkillScan; dynamic sandboxing and LLM-based auditing remain untested.

8. Conclusion

In this work, we present PoisonedSkills, a framework that evaluates supply-chain defenses in coding agent skill ecosystems through Document-Driven Implicit Payload Execution (DDIPE). Experiments on 1,070 adversarial skills across four production frameworks and five models show that no tested configuration is immune: even the strongest defense allows 2.3% direct execution. Model alignment and architectural guardrails interact asymmetrically; removing guardrails amplifies the execution rate from 2.4% to 27.1% for weakly aligned models but barely affects strongly aligned ones. Because only 1.6% of payloads bypass all tested models simultaneously, multi-model verification is a viable countermeasure. Four responsibly disclosed production vulnerabilities confirm that these findings hold outside laboratory settings. Current skill ecosystems grant agent skills the same implicit trust as curated libraries, yet our results show this assumption does not hold. Effective defense requires auditing skill semantics beyond lexical patterns, scoping permissions at the individual skill level, and calibrating architectural safeguards to the underlying model’s alignment strength.

Data Availbility

Our data and source code are available at our website (Anonymous, 2026).

References

Achiam et al. (2023)
J. Achiam, S. Adler, S. Agarwal, L. Ahmad, I. Akkaya, F. L. Aleman, D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat, et al.

Gpt-4 technical report.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.08774.

Cited by: item 1.

Anonymous (2026)
Anonymous

Poisoning agent skills replication package.

Note: https://sites.google.com/view/poisoning-agent-skills

Cited by: Data Availbility.

Anthropic (2024a)
Anthropic

Equipping agents for the real world with agent skills.

Note: https://claude.com/blog/equipping-agents-for-the-real-world-with-agent-skillsOfficial blog post introducing the Agent Skills framework and the SKILL.md specification

Cited by: §2.1.

Anthropic (2024b)
Anthropic

Model context protocol: standardizing context for ai agents.

Note: https://www.anthropic.com/news/model-context-protocolAccessed: 2025-02-20

Cited by: §2.1.

Anthropic (2024c)
Anthropic

The claude 3 model family: opus, sonnet, haiku.

Anthropic, tech. rep..

External Links: Link

Cited by: §2.1,
§5.3.

Artstein and Poesio (2008)
R. Artstein and M. Poesio

Survey article: inter-coder agreement for computational linguistics.

Computational linguistics 34 (4), pp. 555–596.

Cited by: §5.1.

Bender (2001)
R. Bender

Calculating confidence intervals for the number needed to treat.

Controlled clinical trials 22 (2), pp. 102–110.

Cited by: Table 3,
Table 3.

Bhatt et al. (2024)
M. Bhatt, S. Chennabasappa, Y. Li, C. Nikolaidis, D. Song, S. Wan, F. Ahmad, C. Aschermann, Y. Chen, D. Kapil, et al.

Cyberseceval 2: a wide-ranging cybersecurity evaluation suite for large language models.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13161.

Cited by: §5.1.

Brown et al. (2020)
T. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. D. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, et al.

Language models are few-shot learners.

Advances in neural information processing systems 33, pp. 1877–1901.

Cited by: §4.2.

Carlini et al. (2024)
N. Carlini, M. Jagielski, C. A. Choquette-Choo, D. Paleka, W. Pearce, H. Anderson, A. Terzis, K. Thomas, and F. Tramèr

Poisoning web-scale training datasets is practical.

In 2024 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),

pp. 407–425.

Cited by: §2.2.

Chen et al. (2021)
M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. D. O. Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda, N. Joseph, G. Brockman, et al.

Evaluating large language models trained on code.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374.

Cited by: §5.4.

Donenfeld and Oded (2026)
A. Donenfeld and E. Oded

Caught in the hook: rce and api token exfiltration through claude code project files (cve-2025-59536).

Note: Check Point Research

External Links: Link

Cited by: §1,
§3.

Gewirtz (2010)
D. Gewirtz

The threat of" sleeper" software..

Journal of Counterterrorism & Homeland Security International 16 (4).

Cited by: §5.3.

Gilardi et al. (2023)
F. Gilardi, M. Alizadeh, and M. Kubli

ChatGPT outperforms crowd workers for text-annotation tasks.

Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 120 (30), pp. e2305016120.

Cited by: §5.1.

GitHub (2026)
GitHub

GitHub Advisory Database.

Note: https://github.com/advisories[Online; accessed March-2026]

Cited by: §4.3.1.

Glm et al. (2024)
T. Glm, A. Zeng, B. Xu, B. Wang, C. Zhang, D. Yin, D. Zhang, D. Rojas, G. Feng, H. Zhao, et al.

Chatglm: a family of large language models from glm-130b to glm-4 all tools.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.12793.

Cited by: §1.

Greshake et al. (2023)
K. Greshake, S. Abdelnabi, S. Mishra, C. Endres, T. Holz, and M. Fritz

Not what you’ve signed up for: compromising real-world llm-integrated applications with indirect prompt injection.

In Proceedings of the 16th ACM workshop on artificial intelligence and security,

pp. 79–90.

Cited by: §1,
§2.2,
§2.2,
§4.2.

Gu et al. (2017)
T. Gu, B. Dolan-Gavitt, and S. Garg

Badnets: identifying vulnerabilities in the machine learning model supply chain.

arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.06733.

Cited by: §2.2.

Hong et al. (2025)
W. Hong, W. Yu, X. Gu, G. Wang, G. Gan, H. Tang, J. Cheng, J. Qi, J. Ji, L. Pan, et al.

Glm-4.5 v and glm-4.1 v-thinking: towards versatile multimodal reasoning with scalable reinforcement learning.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.01006.

Cited by: §1,
§5.1.

Kaushik (2024)
A. Kaushik

Predefined software environment runtimes as a measure for reproducibility.

In International Congress on Mathematical Software,

pp. 245–253.

Cited by: §5.4.

Liu et al. (2023a)
Y. Liu, D. Iter, Y. Xu, S. Wang, R. Xu, and C. Zhu

G-eval: nlg evaluation using gpt-4 with better human alignment.

In Proceedings of the 2023 conference on empirical methods in natural language processing,

pp. 2511–2522.

Cited by: §5.1.

Liu et al. (2023b)
Y. Liu, G. Deng, Y. Li, K. Wang, Z. Wang, X. Wang, T. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Zheng, et al.

Prompt injection attack against llm-integrated applications.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.05499.

Cited by: §2.2,
§5.1.

Liu et al. (2026)
Y. Liu, W. Wang, R. Feng, Y. Zhang, G. Xu, G. Deng, Y. Li, and L. Zhang

Agent skills in the wild: an empirical study of security vulnerabilities at scale.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.10338.

Cited by: §6.

Ma et al. (2020)
Y. Ma, A. Mockus, R. Zaretzki, R. Bradley, and B. Bichescu

A methodology for analyzing uptake of software technologies among developers.

IEEE transactions on software engineering 48 (2), pp. 485–501.

Cited by: §5.1.

McLoughlin et al. (2022)
G. McLoughlin, M. Gyurkovics, J. Palmer, and S. Makeig

Midfrontal theta activity in psychiatric illness: an index of cognitive vulnerabilities across disorders.

Biological psychiatry 91 (2), pp. 173–182.

Cited by: §5.1.

MiniMax (2024)
MiniMax

MiniMax large language model api documentation.

Note: https://api.minimax.chat/[Online; accessed March-2026]

Cited by: §1,
§5.1.

National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) (2026)
National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)

National vulnerability database (NVD).

Note: https://nvd.nist.gov/[Online; accessed March-2026]

Cited by: §4.3.1.

NSFOCUS Security Research Team (2026)
NSFOCUS Security Research Team

Interpretation of recent ecosystem security events: from rce vulnerabilities to skill supply chain poisoning.

Note: https://blog.nsfocus.net/openclaw/[Online; accessed March-2026]

Cited by: §1.

Ohm et al. (2020)
M. Ohm, H. Plate, A. Sykosch, and M. Meier

Backstabber’s knife collection: a review of open source software supply chain attacks.

In International Conference on Detection of Intrusions and Malware, and Vulnerability Assessment,

pp. 23–43.

Cited by: §1.

OpenRouter (2026)
OpenRouter

OpenRouter model rankings.

Note: https://openrouter.ai/rankingsAccessed: 2026-03-15

Cited by: §5.1.

OWASP Foundation (2023)
OWASP Foundation

OWASP top 10 for large language model applications.

External Links: Link

Cited by: §3,
§4.3.1.

Perez et al. (2022)
E. Perez, S. Huang, F. Song, T. Cai, R. Ring, J. Aslanides, A. Glaese, N. McAleese, and G. Irving

Red teaming language models with language models.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2202.03286.

Cited by: §2.2,
§4.2.

Qin et al. (2024)
Y. Qin, S. Hu, Y. Lin, W. Chen, N. Ding, G. Cui, Z. Zeng, X. Zhou, Y. Huang, C. Xiao, et al.

Tool learning with foundation models.

ACM Computing Surveys 57 (4), pp. 1–40.

Cited by: §1,
§2.1.

Qu et al. (2025a)
Y. Qu, S. Huang, L. Li, P. Nie, and Y. Yao

Beyond intentions: a critical survey of misalignment in llms..

Computers, Materials & Continua 85 (1).

Cited by: §2.2.

Qu et al. (2025b)
Y. Qu, S. Huang, and P. Nie

A review of backdoor attacks and defenses in code large language models: implications for security measures.

Information and Software Technology, pp. 107707.

Cited by: §2.2.

Rehberger (2024)
J. Rehberger

Exfiltrating personal data from ChatGPT via markdown images (Log-To-Leak).

Note: https://embracethered.com/blog/posts/2023/chatgpt-webpilot-data-exfil-via-markdown-injection/Online; accessed 2024

Cited by: §2.2.

Schmotz et al. (2026)
D. Schmotz, L. Beurer-Kellner, S. Abdelnabi, and M. Andriushchenko

Skill-inject: measuring agent vulnerability to skill file attacks.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.20156.

Cited by: §1,
§2.2,
§5.2.

SkillsMP (2026)
SkillsMP

SkillsMP: the agent skills marketplace.

Note: https://skillsmp.com/[Online; accessed 26-March-2026]

Cited by: §3.

Sneh et al. (2025)
J. Sneh, R. Yan, J. Yu, P. Torr, Y. Gal, S. Sengupta, E. Sommerlade, A. Paren, and A. Bibi

Tooltweak: an attack on tool selection in llm-based agents.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.02554.

Cited by: §1,
§2.2,
§5.2.

Strom et al. (2018)
B. I. Strom, A. Applebaum, D. P. Miller, K. C. Nickels, A. G. Pennington, and C. B. Thomas

MITRE att&ck®: design and philosophy.

Technical report

The MITRE Corporation.

External Links: Link

Cited by: §3,
§4.3.1.

Taylor and Alves-Foss (2005)
C. Taylor and J. Alves-Foss

Diversity as a computer defense mechanism.

In Proceedings of the 2005 workshop on New security paradigms,

pp. 11–14.

Cited by: §5.3.

Team et al. (2023)
G. Team, R. Anil, S. Borgeaud, J. Alayrac, J. Yu, R. Soricut, J. Schalkwyk, A. M. Dai, A. Hauth, K. Millican, et al.

Gemini: a family of highly capable multimodal models.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11805.

Cited by: §1,
§2.1,
§5.4,
§5.4.

Touvron et al. (2023)
H. Touvron, L. Martin, K. Stone, P. Albert, A. Almahairi, Y. Babaei, N. Bashlykov, S. Batra, P. Bhargava, S. Bhosale, et al.

Llama 2: open foundation and fine-tuned chat models.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.09288.

Cited by: item 1.

Wang et al. (2024a)
L. Wang, C. Ma, X. Feng, Z. Zhang, H. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Tang, X. Chen, Y. Lin, et al.

A survey on large language model based autonomous agents.

Frontiers of Computer Science 18 (6), pp. 186345.

Cited by: §1.

Wang et al. (2024b)
X. Wang, B. Li, Y. Song, F. F. Xu, X. Tang, M. Zhuge, J. Pan, Y. Song, B. Li, J. Singh, et al.

Openhands: an open platform for ai software developers as generalist agents.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.16741.

Cited by: §2.1.

Wu et al. (2022)
Y. Wu, D. Zou, S. Dou, W. Yang, D. Xu, and H. Jin

VulCNN: an image-inspired scalable vulnerability detection system.

In Proceedings of the 44th International Conference on Software Engineering,

pp. 2365–2376.

Cited by: §5.3.

Xi et al. (2025)
Z. Xi, W. Chen, X. Guo, W. He, Y. Ding, B. Hong, M. Zhang, J. Wang, S. Jin, E. Zhou, et al.

The rise and potential of large language model based agents: a survey.

Science China Information Sciences 68 (2), pp. 121101.

Cited by: §1,
§2.1.

Yang et al. (2022)
H. Yang, S. Lin, L. Cheng, Y. Lu, and H. Wang

Scinet: semantic cue infusion network for lane detection.

In 2022 IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP),

pp. 1811–1815.

Cited by: §5.3.

Yu et al. (2022)
S. Yu, Y. Qu, X. Hu, and H. Yin

deepdi: Learning a relational graph convolutional network model on instructions for fast and accurate disassembly.

In 31st USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 22),

pp. 2709–2725.

Cited by: §5.4.

Yuan et al. (2024)
T. Yuan, Z. He, L. Dong, Y. Wang, R. Zhao, T. Xia, L. Xu, B. Zhou, F. Li, Z. Zhang, et al.

R-judge: benchmarking safety risk awareness for llm agents.

In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024,

pp. 1467–1490.

Cited by: §5.1.

Zhan et al. (2024)
Q. Zhan, Z. Liang, Z. Ying, and D. Kang

Injecagent: benchmarking indirect prompt injections in tool-integrated large language model agents.

In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2024,

pp. 10471–10506.

Cited by: §5.1,
§5.1,
§5.1.

Zheng et al. (2023)
L. Zheng, W. Chiang, Y. Sheng, S. Zhuang, Z. Wu, Y. Zhuang, Z. Lin, Z. Li, D. Li, E. Xing, et al.

Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena.

Advances in neural information processing systems 36, pp. 46595–46623.

Cited by: §5.1.

Zou et al. (2023)
A. Zou, Z. Wang, N. Carlini, M. Nasr, J. Z. Kolter, and M. Fredrikson

Universal and transferable adversarial attacks on aligned language models.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15043.

Cited by: §5.1.

Zou et al. (2025)
W. Zou, R. Geng, B. Wang, and J. Jia

poisonedrag: Knowledge corruption attacks to retrieval-augmented generation of large language models.

In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25),

pp. 3827–3844.

Cited by: item 2,
§1,
§2.2.

Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by

L
A
T
E

xml

.

Instructions for reporting errors

We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:

Click the "Report Issue" () button, located in the page header.

Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.

Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
all.

Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.

We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.

About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)

Major funding support from
