https://arxiv.org/api/dKNSwtbiE2rYgl5wZRyZo+g9PJs
arXiv Query: search_query=submittedDate:"202504280000 TO 202504302359" AND ( (cat:cs.CV OR cat:cs.RO OR cat:cs.LG) AND (all:"foundation model" OR all:"world model" OR all:"vision language" OR all:"video generation" OR all:"flow matching" OR all:"diffusion model") )&id_list=&start=0&max_results=100
2026-10-07T07:18:22Z
100
95
0
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19402v1
Boosting 3D Liver Shape Datasets with Diffusion Models and Implicit Neural Representations
2025-04-28T00:56:18Z
While the availability of open 3D medical shape datasets is increasing, offering substantial benefits to the research community, we have found that many of these datasets are, unfortunately, disorganized and contain artifacts. These issues limit the development and training of robust models, particularly for accurate 3D reconstruction tasks. In this paper, we examine the current state of available 3D liver shape datasets and propose a solution using diffusion models combined with implicit neural representations (INRs) to augment and expand existing datasets. Our approach utilizes the generative capabilities of diffusion models to create realistic, diverse 3D liver shapes, capturing a wide range of anatomical variations and addressing the problem of data scarcity. Experimental results indicate that our method enhances dataset diversity, providing a scalable solution to improve the accuracy and reliability of 3D liver reconstruction and generation in medical applications. Finally, we suggest that diffusion models can also be applied to other downstream tasks in 3D medical imaging.
2025-04-28T00:56:18Z
Khoa Tuan Nguyen
Francesca Tozzi
Wouter Willaert
Joris Vankerschaver
Nikdokht Rashidian
Wesley De Neve
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19502v2
Simultaneous Pick and Place Detection by Combining SE(3) Diffusion Models with Differential Kinematics
2025-08-05T04:44:04Z
Grasp detection methods typically target the detection of a set of free-floating hand poses that can grasp the object. However, not all of the detected grasp poses are executable due to physical constraints. Even though it is straightforward to filter invalid grasp poses in the post-process, such a two-staged approach is computationally inefficient, especially when the constraint is hard. In this work, we propose an approach to take the following two constraints into account during the grasp detection stage, namely, (i) the picked object must be able to be placed with a predefined configuration without in-hand manipulation (ii) it must be reachable by the robot under the joint limit and collision-avoidance constraints for both pick and place cases. Our key idea is to train an SE(3) grasp diffusion network to estimate the noise in the form of spatial velocity, and constrain the denoising process by a multi-target differential inverse kinematics with an inequality constraint, so that the states are guaranteed to be reachable and placement can be performed without collision. In addition to an improved success ratio, we experimentally confirmed that our approach is more efficient and consistent in computation time compared to a naive two-stage approach.
2025-04-28T05:49:59Z
Accepted for IROS2025
Tianyi Ko
Takuya Ikeda
Balazs Opra
Koichi Nishiwaki
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19506v1
SynergyAmodal: Deocclude Anything with Text Control
2025-04-28T06:04:17Z
Image deocclusion (or amodal completion) aims to recover the invisible regions (\ie, shape and appearance) of occluded instances in images. Despite recent advances, the scarcity of high-quality data that balances diversity, plausibility, and fidelity remains a major obstacle. To address this challenge, we identify three critical elements: leveraging in-the-wild image data for diversity, incorporating human expertise for plausibility, and utilizing generative priors for fidelity. We propose SynergyAmodal, a novel framework for co-synthesizing in-the-wild amodal datasets with comprehensive shape and appearance annotations, which integrates these elements through a tripartite data-human-model collaboration. First, we design an occlusion-grounded self-supervised learning algorithm to harness the diversity of in-the-wild image data, fine-tuning an inpainting diffusion model into a partial completion diffusion model. Second, we establish a co-synthesis pipeline to iteratively filter, refine, select, and annotate the initial deocclusion results of the partial completion diffusion model, ensuring plausibility and fidelity through human expert guidance and prior model constraints. This pipeline generates a high-quality paired amodal dataset with extensive category and scale diversity, comprising approximately 16K pairs. Finally, we train a full completion diffusion model on the synthesized dataset, incorporating text prompts as conditioning signals. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our framework in achieving zero-shot generalization and textual controllability. Our code, dataset, and models will be made publicly available at https://github.com/imlixinyang/SynergyAmodal.
2025-04-28T06:04:17Z
17 pages
Xinyang Li
Chengjie Yi
Jiawei Lai
Mingbao Lin
Yansong Qu
Shengchuan Zhang
Liujuan Cao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19524v1
LR-IAD:Mask-Free Industrial Anomaly Detection with Logical Reasoning
2025-04-28T06:52:35Z
Industrial Anomaly Detection (IAD) is critical for ensuring product quality by identifying defects. Traditional methods such as feature embedding and reconstruction-based approaches require large datasets and struggle with scalability. Existing vision-language models (VLMs) and Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) address some limitations but rely on mask annotations, leading to high implementation costs and false positives. Additionally, industrial datasets like MVTec-AD and VisA suffer from severe class imbalance, with defect samples constituting only 23.8% and 11.1% of total data respectively. To address these challenges, we propose a reward function that dynamically prioritizes rare defect patterns during training to handle class imbalance. We also introduce a mask-free reasoning framework using Chain of Thought (CoT) and Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) mechanisms, enabling anomaly detection directly from raw images without annotated masks. This approach generates interpretable step-by-step explanations for defect localization. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance, outperforming prior approaches by 36% in accuracy on MVTec-AD and 16% on VisA. By eliminating mask dependency and reducing costs while providing explainable outputs, this work advances industrial anomaly detection and supports scalable quality control in manufacturing. Code to reproduce the experiment is available at https://github.com/LilaKen/LR-IAD.
2025-04-28T06:52:35Z
10 pages
Peijian Zeng
Feiyan Pang
Zhanbo Wang
Aimin Yang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19538v1
Towards Faster and More Compact Foundation Models for Molecular Property Prediction
2025-04-28T07:41:03Z
Advancements in machine learning for molecular property prediction have improved accuracy but at the expense of higher computational cost and longer training times. Recently, the Joint Multi-domain Pre-training (JMP) foundation model has demonstrated strong performance across various downstream tasks with reduced training time over previous models. Despite JMP's advantages, fine-tuning it on molecular datasets ranging from small-scale to large-scale requires considerable time and computational resources. In this work, we investigate strategies to enhance efficiency by reducing model size while preserving performance. To better understand the model's efficiency, we analyze the layer contributions of JMP and find that later interaction blocks provide diminishing returns, suggesting an opportunity for model compression. We explore block reduction strategies by pruning the pre-trained model and evaluating its impact on efficiency and accuracy during fine-tuning. Our analysis reveals that removing two interaction blocks results in a minimal performance drop, reducing the model size by 32% while increasing inference throughput by 1.3x. These results suggest that JMP-L is over-parameterized and that a smaller, more efficient variant can achieve comparable performance with lower computational cost. Our study provides insights for developing lighter, faster, and more scalable foundation models for molecular and materials discovery. The code is publicly available at: https://github.com/Yasir-Ghunaim/efficient-jmp.
2025-04-28T07:41:03Z
Yasir Ghunaim
Andrés Villa
Gergo Ignacz
Gyorgy Szekely
Motasem Alfarra
Bernard Ghanem
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19596v3
Towards Robust Multimodal Physiological Foundation Models: Handling Arbitrary Missing Modalities
2026-03-17T14:09:10Z
Multimodal physiological signals, such as EEG, ECG, EOG, and EMG, are crucial for healthcare and brain-computer interfaces. While existing methods rely on specialized architectures and dataset-specific fusion strategies, they struggle to learn universal representations that generalize across datasets and handle missing modalities at inference time. To address these issues, we propose PhysioOmni, a foundation model for multimodal physiological signal analysis that models both homogeneous and heterogeneous features to decouple multimodal signals and extract generic representations while maintaining compatibility with arbitrary missing modalities. PhysioOmni trains a decoupled multimodal tokenizer, enabling masked signal pre-training via modality-invariant and modality-specific objectives. To ensure adaptability to diverse and incomplete modality combinations, the pre-trained encoders undergo resilient fine-tuning with prototype alignment on downstream datasets. Extensive experiments on four downstream tasks, emotion recognition, sleep stage classification, motor prediction, and mental workload detection, demonstrate that PhysioOmni achieves state-of-the-art performance while maintaining strong robustness to missing modalities. Our code and model weights will be released.
2025-04-28T09:00:04Z
19 pages, 5 figures
Wei-Bang Jiang
Xi Fu
Yi Ding
Cuntai Guan
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19600v3
Heat Diffusion Models -- Interpixel Attention Mechanism
2025-08-27T03:26:08Z
Denoising Diffusion Probabilistic Models (DDPM) process images as a whole. Since adjacent pixels are highly likely to belong to the same object, we propose the Heat Diffusion Model (HDM) to further preserve image details and generate more realistic images. HDM essentially is a DDPM that incorporates an attention mechanism between pixels. In HDM, the discrete form of the two-dimensional heat equation is integrated into the diffusion and generation formulas of DDPM, enabling the model to compute relationships between neighboring pixels during image processing. Our experiments demonstrate that HDM can generate higher-quality samples compared to models such as DDPM, Consistency Diffusion Models (CDM), Latent Diffusion Models (LDM), and Vector Quantized Generative Adversarial Networks (VQGAN).
2025-04-28T09:03:33Z
Pengfei Zhang
Shouqing Jia
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19614v1
DiVE: Efficient Multi-View Driving Scenes Generation Based on Video Diffusion Transformer
2025-04-28T09:20:50Z
Collecting multi-view driving scenario videos to enhance the performance of 3D visual perception tasks presents significant challenges and incurs substantial costs, making generative models for realistic data an appealing alternative. Yet, the videos generated by recent works suffer from poor quality and spatiotemporal consistency, undermining their utility in advancing perception tasks under driving scenarios. To address this gap, we propose DiVE, a diffusion transformer-based generative framework meticulously engineered to produce high-fidelity, temporally coherent, and cross-view consistent multi-view videos, aligning seamlessly with bird's-eye view layouts and textual descriptions. DiVE leverages a unified cross-attention and a SketchFormer to exert precise control over multimodal data, while incorporating a view-inflated attention mechanism that adds no extra parameters, thereby guaranteeing consistency across views. Despite these advancements, synthesizing high-resolution videos under multimodal constraints introduces dual challenges: investigating the optimal classifier-free guidance coniguration under intricate multi-condition inputs and mitigating excessive computational latency in high-resolution rendering--both of which remain underexplored in prior researches. To resolve these limitations, we introduce two innovations: Multi-Control Auxiliary Branch Distillation, which streamlines multi-condition CFG selection while circumventing high computational overhead, and Resolution Progressive Sampling, a training-free acceleration strategy that staggers resolution scaling to reduce high latency due to high resolution. These innovations collectively achieve a 2.62x speedup with minimal quality degradation. Evaluated on the nuScenes dataset, DiVE achieves SOTA performance in multi-view video generation, yielding photorealistic outputs with exceptional temporal and cross-view coherence.
2025-04-28T09:20:50Z
Junpeng Jiang
Gangyi Hong
Miao Zhang
Hengtong Hu
Kun Zhan
Rui Shao
Liqiang Nie
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19621v2
AI Alignment in Medical Imaging: Unveiling Hidden Biases Through Counterfactual Analysis
2026-07-29T09:50:10Z
Machine learning (ML) systems for medical imaging have demonstrated remarkable diagnostic capabilities, but their susceptibility to biases poses significant risks, since biases may negatively impact generalization performance. In this paper, we introduce a novel statistical framework to evaluate the dependency of medical imaging ML models on sensitive attributes, such as demographics. Our method leverages the concept of counterfactual invariance, measuring the extent to which a model's predictions remain unchanged under hypothetical changes to sensitive attributes. We present a practical algorithm that combines conditional latent diffusion models with statistical hypothesis testing to identify and quantify such biases without requiring direct access to counterfactual data. Through experiments on synthetic datasets and large-scale real-world medical imaging datasets, including \textsc{cheXpert} and MIMIC-CXR, we demonstrate that our approach aligns closely with counterfactual fairness principles and outperforms standard baselines. This work provides a robust tool to ensure that ML diagnostic systems generalize well, e.g., across demographic groups, offering a critical step towards AI safety in healthcare. Code: https://github.com/Neferpitou3871/AI-Alignment-Medical-Imaging.
2025-04-28T09:28:25Z
Haroui Ma
Francesco Quinzan
Theresa Willem
Stefan Bauer
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19627v2
VCM: Vision Concept Modeling Based on Implicit Contrastive Learning with Vision-Language Instruction Fine-Tuning
2025-05-19T13:44:04Z
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) are pivotal for real-world AI tasks like embodied intelligence due to their strong vision-language reasoning abilities. However, current LVLMs process entire images at the token level, which is inefficient compared to humans who analyze information and generate content at the conceptual level, extracting relevant visual concepts with minimal effort. This inefficiency, stemming from the lack of a visual concept model, limits LVLMs' usability in real-world applications. To address this, we propose VCM, an end-to-end self-supervised visual concept modeling framework. VCM leverages implicit contrastive learning across multiple sampled instances and vision-language fine-tuning to construct a visual concept model without requiring costly concept-level annotations. Our results show that VCM significantly reduces computational costs (e.g., 85\% fewer FLOPs for LLaVA-1.5-7B) while maintaining strong performance across diverse image understanding tasks. Moreover, VCM enhances visual encoders' capabilities in classic visual concept perception tasks. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments validate the effectiveness and efficiency of VCM.
2025-04-28T09:39:07Z
VCM
Run Luo
Renke Shan
Longze Chen
Ziqiang Liu
Lu Wang
Min Yang
Xiaobo Xia
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19652v1
Robot Motion Planning using One-Step Diffusion with Noise-Optimized Approximate Motions
2025-04-28T10:10:17Z
This paper proposes an image-based robot motion planning method using a one-step diffusion model. While the diffusion model allows for high-quality motion generation, its computational cost is too expensive to control a robot in real time. To achieve high quality and efficiency simultaneously, our one-step diffusion model takes an approximately generated motion, which is predicted directly from input images. This approximate motion is optimized by additive noise provided by our novel noise optimizer. Unlike general isotropic noise, our noise optimizer adjusts noise anisotropically depending on the uncertainty of each motion element. Our experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms state-of-the-art methods while maintaining its efficiency by one-step diffusion.
2025-04-28T10:10:17Z
7 pages, 5 figures. Under peer review
Tomoharu Aizu
Takeru Oba
Yuki Kondo
Norimichi Ukita
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19718v3
Pixels2Points: Fusing 2D and 3D Features for Facial Skin Segmentation
2025-05-24T10:20:30Z
Face registration deforms a template mesh to closely fit a 3D face scan, the quality of which commonly degrades in non-skin regions (e.g., hair, beard, accessories), because the optimized template-to-scan distance pulls the template mesh towards the noisy scan surface. Improving registration quality requires a clean separation of skin and non-skin regions on the scan mesh. Existing image-based (2D) or scan-based (3D) segmentation methods however perform poorly. Image-based segmentation outputs multi-view inconsistent masks, and they cannot account for scan inaccuracies or scan-image misalignment, while scan-based methods suffer from lower spatial resolution compared to images. In this work, we introduce a novel method that accurately separates skin from non-skin geometry on 3D human head scans. For this, our method extracts features from multi-view images using a frozen image foundation model and aggregates these features in 3D. These lifted 2D features are then fused with 3D geometric features extracted from the scan mesh, to then predict a segmentation mask directly on the scan mesh. We show that our segmentations improve the registration accuracy over pure 2D or 3D segmentation methods by 8.89% and 14.3%, respectively. Although trained only on synthetic data, our model generalizes well to real data.
2025-04-28T12:13:12Z
4 pages, 4 figures, published in Eurographics 2025 as a short paper
Victoria Yue Chen
Daoye Wang
Stephan Garbin
Jan Bednarik
Sebastian Winberg
Timo Bolkart
Thabo Beeler
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19739v1
Contrastive Language-Image Learning with Augmented Textual Prompts for 3D/4D FER Using Vision-Language Model
2025-04-28T12:36:14Z
In this paper, we introduce AffectVLM, a vision-language model designed to integrate multiviews for a semantically rich and visually comprehensive understanding of facial emotions from 3D/4D data. To effectively capture visual features, we propose a joint representation learning framework paired with a novel gradient-friendly loss function that accelerates model convergence towards optimal feature representation. Additionally, we introduce augmented textual prompts to enhance the model's linguistic capabilities and employ mixed view augmentation to expand the visual dataset. We also develop a Streamlit app for a real-time interactive inference and enable the model for distributed learning. Extensive experiments validate the superior performance of AffectVLM across multiple benchmarks.
2025-04-28T12:36:14Z
Muzammil Behzad
Guoying Zhao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19742v1
EcoWikiRS: Learning Ecological Representation of Satellite Images from Weak Supervision with Species Observations and Wikipedia
2025-04-28T12:42:18Z
The presence of species provides key insights into the ecological properties of a location such as land cover, climatic conditions or even soil properties. We propose a method to predict such ecological properties directly from remote sensing (RS) images by aligning them with species habitat descriptions. We introduce the EcoWikiRS dataset, consisting of high-resolution aerial images, the corresponding geolocated species observations, and, for each species, the textual descriptions of their habitat from Wikipedia. EcoWikiRS offers a scalable way of supervision for RS vision language models (RS-VLMs) for ecology. This is a setting with weak and noisy supervision, where, for instance, some text may describe properties that are specific only to part of the species' niche or is irrelevant to a specific image. We tackle this by proposing WINCEL, a weighted version of the InfoNCE loss. We evaluate our model on the task of ecosystem zero-shot classification by following the habitat definitions from the European Nature Information System (EUNIS). Our results show that our approach helps in understanding RS images in a more ecologically meaningful manner. The code and the dataset are available at https://github.com/eceo-epfl/EcoWikiRS.
2025-04-28T12:42:18Z
Accepted at EarthVision 2025 (CVPRW 2025)
Valerie Zermatten
Javiera Castillo-Navarro
Pallavi Jain
Devis Tuia
Diego Marcos
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19774v2
If Concept Bottlenecks are the Question, are Foundation Models the Answer?
2025-04-29T10:54:44Z
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) are neural networks designed to conjoin high performance with ante-hoc interpretability. CBMs work by first mapping inputs (e.g., images) to high-level concepts (e.g., visible objects and their properties) and then use these to solve a downstream task (e.g., tagging or scoring an image) in an interpretable manner. Their performance and interpretability, however, hinge on the quality of the concepts they learn. The go-to strategy for ensuring good quality concepts is to leverage expert annotations, which are expensive to collect and seldom available in applications. Researchers have recently addressed this issue by introducing "VLM-CBM" architectures that replace manual annotations with weak supervision from foundation models. It is however unclear what is the impact of doing so on the quality of the learned concepts. To answer this question, we put state-of-the-art VLM-CBMs to the test, analyzing their learned concepts empirically using a selection of significant metrics. Our results show that, depending on the task, VLM supervision can sensibly differ from expert annotations, and that concept accuracy and quality are not strongly correlated. Our code is available at https://github.com/debryu/CQA.
2025-04-28T13:18:48Z
Nicola Debole
Pietro Barbiero
Francesco Giannini
Andrea Passerini
Stefano Teso
Emanuele Marconato
10.1007/s10994-026-06999-y
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19792v1
Contextures: The Mechanism of Representation Learning
2025-04-28T13:36:28Z
This dissertation establishes the contexture theory to mathematically characterize the mechanism of representation learning, or pretraining. Despite the remarkable empirical success of foundation models, it is not very clear what representations they learn, and why these representations are useful for various downstream tasks. A scientific understanding of representation learning is critical, especially at this point when scaling up the model size is producing diminishing returns, and designing new pretraining methods is imperative for further progress.
Prior work treated different representation learning methods quite differently, whereas the contexture theory provides a unified framework for analyzing these methods. The central argument is that a representation is learned from the association between the input X and a context variable A. We prove that if an encoder captures the maximum information of this association, in which case we say that the encoder learns the contexture, then it will be optimal on the class of tasks that are compatible with the context. We also show that a context is the most useful when the association between X and A is neither too strong nor too weak. The important implication of the contexture theory is that increasing the model size alone will achieve diminishing returns, and further advancements require better contexts.
We demonstrate that many pretraining objectives can learn the contexture, including supervised learning, self-supervised learning, generative models, etc. Then, we introduce two general objectives -- SVME and KISE, for learning the contexture. We also show how to mix multiple contexts together, an effortless way to create better contexts from existing ones. Then, we prove statistical learning bounds for representation learning. Finally, we discuss the effect of the data distribution shift from pretraining to the downstream task.
2025-04-28T13:36:28Z
PhD Dissertation
Runtian Zhai
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19847v1
Foundation Model-Driven Framework for Human-Object Interaction Prediction with Segmentation Mask Integration
2025-04-28T14:45:26Z
In this work, we introduce Segmentation to Human-Object Interaction (\textit{\textbf{Seg2HOI}}) approach, a novel framework that integrates segmentation-based vision foundation models with the human-object interaction task, distinguished from traditional detection-based Human-Object Interaction (HOI) methods. Our approach enhances HOI detection by not only predicting the standard triplets but also introducing quadruplets, which extend HOI triplets by including segmentation masks for human-object pairs. More specifically, Seg2HOI inherits the properties of the vision foundation model (e.g., promptable and interactive mechanisms) and incorporates a decoder that applies these attributes to HOI task. Despite training only for HOI, without additional training mechanisms for these properties, the framework demonstrates that such features still operate efficiently. Extensive experiments on two public benchmark datasets demonstrate that Seg2HOI achieves performance comparable to state-of-the-art methods, even in zero-shot scenarios. Lastly, we propose that Seg2HOI can generate HOI quadruplets and interactive HOI segmentation from novel text and visual prompts that were not used during training, making it versatile for a wide range of applications by leveraging this flexibility.
2025-04-28T14:45:26Z
Juhan Park
Kyungjae Lee
Hyung Jin Chang
Jungchan Cho
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19851v1
Do You Know the Way? Human-in-the-Loop Understanding for Fast Traversability Estimation in Mobile Robotics
2025-04-28T14:46:51Z
The increasing use of robots in unstructured environments necessitates the development of effective perception and navigation strategies to enable field robots to successfully perform their tasks. In particular, it is key for such robots to understand where in their environment they can and cannot travel -- a task known as traversability estimation. However, existing geometric approaches to traversability estimation may fail to capture nuanced representations of traversability, whereas vision-based approaches typically either involve manually annotating a large number of images or require robot experience. In addition, existing methods can struggle to address domain shifts as they typically do not learn during deployment. To this end, we propose a human-in-the-loop (HiL) method for traversability estimation that prompts a human for annotations as-needed. Our method uses a foundation model to enable rapid learning on new annotations and to provide accurate predictions even when trained on a small number of quickly-provided HiL annotations. We extensively validate our method in simulation and on real-world data, and demonstrate that it can provide state-of-the-art traversability prediction performance.
2025-04-28T14:46:51Z
Accepted by RA-L. Code is available at https://github.com/andreschreiber/CHUNGUS
Andre Schreiber
Katherine Driggs-Campbell
10.1109/LRA.2025.3563819
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19854v1
NORA: A Small Open-Sourced Generalist Vision Language Action Model for Embodied Tasks
2025-04-28T14:47:34Z
Existing Visual-Language-Action (VLA) models have shown promising performance in zero-shot scenarios, demonstrating impressive task execution and reasoning capabilities. However, a significant challenge arises from the limitations of visual encoding, which can result in failures during tasks such as object grasping. Moreover, these models typically suffer from high computational overhead due to their large sizes, often exceeding 7B parameters. While these models excel in reasoning and task planning, the substantial computational overhead they incur makes them impractical for real-time robotic environments, where speed and efficiency are paramount. To address the limitations of existing VLA models, we propose NORA, a 3B-parameter model designed to reduce computational overhead while maintaining strong task performance. NORA adopts the Qwen-2.5-VL-3B multimodal model as its backbone, leveraging its superior visual-semantic understanding to enhance visual reasoning and action grounding. Additionally, our \model{} is trained on 970k real-world robot demonstrations and equipped with the FAST+ tokenizer for efficient action sequence generation. Experimental results demonstrate that NORA outperforms existing large-scale VLA models, achieving better task performance with significantly reduced computational overhead, making it a more practical solution for real-time robotic autonomy.
2025-04-28T14:47:34Z
Chia-Yu Hung
Qi Sun
Pengfei Hong
Amir Zadeh
Chuan Li
U-Xuan Tan
Navonil Majumder
Soujanya Poria
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19860v3
CoherenDream: Boosting Holistic Text Coherence in 3D Generation via Multimodal Large Language Models Feedback
2025-08-13T09:30:16Z
Score Distillation Sampling (SDS) has achieved remarkable success in text-to-3D content generation. However, SDS-based methods struggle to maintain semantic fidelity for user prompts, particularly when involving multiple objects with intricate interactions. While existing approaches often address 3D consistency through multiview diffusion model fine-tuning on 3D datasets, this strategy inadvertently exacerbates text-3D alignment degradation. The limitation stems from SDS's inherent accumulation of view-independent biases during optimization, which progressively diverges from the ideal text alignment direction. To alleviate this limitation, we propose a novel SDS objective, dubbed as Textual Coherent Score Distillation (TCSD), which integrates alignment feedback from multimodal large language models (MLLMs). Our TCSD leverages cross-modal understanding capabilities of MLLMs to assess and guide the text-3D correspondence during the optimization. We further develop 3DLLaVA-CRITIC - a fine-tuned MLLM specialized for evaluating multiview text alignment in 3D generations. Additionally, we introduce an LLM-layout initialization that significantly accelerates optimization convergence through semantic-aware spatial configuration. Our framework, CoherenDream, achieves consistent improvement across multiple metrics on TIFA subset.As the first study to incorporate MLLMs into SDS optimization, we also conduct extensive ablation studies to explore optimal MLLM adaptations for 3D generation tasks.
2025-04-28T14:50:45Z
Chenhan Jiang
Yihan Zeng
Dit-Yan Yeung
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19876v1
DeeCLIP: A Robust and Generalizable Transformer-Based Framework for Detecting AI-Generated Images
2025-04-28T15:06:28Z
This paper introduces DeeCLIP, a novel framework for detecting AI-generated images using CLIP-ViT and fusion learning. Despite significant advancements in generative models capable of creating highly photorealistic images, existing detection methods often struggle to generalize across different models and are highly sensitive to minor perturbations. To address these challenges, DeeCLIP incorporates DeeFuser, a fusion module that combines high-level and low-level features, improving robustness against degradations such as compression and blurring. Additionally, we apply triplet loss to refine the embedding space, enhancing the model's ability to distinguish between real and synthetic content. To further enable lightweight adaptation while preserving pre-trained knowledge, we adopt parameter-efficient fine-tuning using low-rank adaptation (LoRA) within the CLIP-ViT backbone. This approach supports effective zero-shot learning without sacrificing generalization. Trained exclusively on 4-class ProGAN data, DeeCLIP achieves an average accuracy of 89.00% on 19 test subsets composed of generative adversarial network (GAN) and diffusion models. Despite having fewer trainable parameters, DeeCLIP outperforms existing methods, demonstrating superior robustness against various generative models and real-world distortions. The code is publicly available at https://github.com/Mamadou-Keita/DeeCLIP for research purposes.
2025-04-28T15:06:28Z
Mamadou Keita
Wassim Hamidouche
Hessen Bougueffa Eutamene
Abdelmalik Taleb-Ahmed
Abdenour Hadid
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21505v2
Generative Machine Learning for Multivariate Angular Simulation
2025-12-08T12:47:50Z
With the recent development of new geometric and angular-radial frameworks for multivariate extremes, reliably simulating from angular variables in moderate-to-high dimensions is of increasing importance. Empirical approaches have the benefit of simplicity, and work reasonably well in low dimensions, but as the number of variables increases, they can lack the required flexibility and scalability. Classical parametric models for angular variables, such as the von Mises--Fisher distribution (vMF), provide an alternative. Exploiting finite mixtures of vMF distributions increases their flexibility, but there are cases where, without letting the number of mixture components grow considerably, a mixture model with a fixed number of components is not sufficient to capture the intricate features that can arise in data. Owing to their flexibility, generative deep learning methods are able to capture complex data structures; they therefore have the potential to be useful in the simulation of multivariate angular variables. In this paper, we introduce a range of deep learning approaches for this task, including generative adversarial networks, normalizing flows and flow matching. We assess their performance via a range of metrics, and make comparisons to the more classical approach of using a finite mixture of vMF distributions. The methods are also applied to a metocean data set, with diagnostics indicating strong performance, demonstrating the applicability of such techniques to real-world, complex data structures.
2025-04-28T16:38:58Z
Jakob Benjamin Wessel
Callum J. R. Murphy-Barltrop
Emma S. Simpson
10.1007/s10687-025-00522-7
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19989v2
HJRNO: Hamilton-Jacobi Reachability with Neural Operators
2025-06-06T10:32:08Z
Ensuring the safety of autonomous systems under uncertainty is a critical challenge. Hamilton-Jacobi reachability (HJR) analysis is a widely used method for guaranteeing safety under worst-case disturbances. In this work, we propose HJRNO, a neural operator-based framework for solving backward reachable tubes (BRTs) efficiently and accurately. By leveraging neural operators, HJRNO learns a mapping between value functions, enabling fast inference with strong generalization across different obstacle shapes and system configurations. We demonstrate that HJRNO achieves low error on random obstacle scenarios and generalizes effectively across varying system dynamics. These results suggest that HJRNO offers a promising foundation model approach for scalable, real-time safety analysis in autonomous systems.
2025-04-28T17:06:05Z
Yankai Li
Mo Chen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20024v2
SpatialReasoner: Towards Explicit and Generalizable 3D Spatial Reasoning
2025-06-10T17:53:33Z
Despite recent advances on multi-modal models, 3D spatial reasoning remains a challenging task for state-of-the-art open-source and proprietary models. Recent studies explore data-driven approaches and achieve enhanced spatial reasoning performance by fine-tuning models on 3D-related visual question-answering data. However, these methods typically perform spatial reasoning in an implicit manner and often fail on questions that are trivial to humans, even with long chain-of-thought reasoning. In this work, we introduce SpatialReasoner, a novel large vision-language model (LVLM) that addresses 3D spatial reasoning with explicit 3D representations shared between multiple stages--3D perception, computation, and reasoning. Explicit 3D representations provide a coherent interface that supports advanced 3D spatial reasoning and improves the generalization ability to novel question types. Furthermore, by analyzing the explicit 3D representations in multi-step reasoning traces of SpatialReasoner, we study the factual errors and identify key shortcomings of current LVLMs. Results show that our SpatialReasoner achieves improved performance on a variety of spatial reasoning benchmarks, outperforming Gemini 2.0 by 9.2% on 3DSRBench, and generalizes better when evaluating on novel 3D spatial reasoning questions. Our study bridges the 3D parsing capabilities of prior visual foundation models with the powerful reasoning abilities of large language models, opening new directions for 3D spatial reasoning.
2025-04-28T17:48:43Z
Project page: https://spatial-reasoner.github.io
Wufei Ma
Yu-Cheng Chou
Qihao Liu
Xingrui Wang
Celso de Melo
Jianwen Xie
Alan Yuille
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20179v1
Integration Flow Models
2025-04-28T18:29:15Z
Ordinary differential equation (ODE) based generative models have emerged as a powerful approach for producing high-quality samples in many applications. However, the ODE-based methods either suffer the discretization error of numerical solvers of ODE, which restricts the quality of samples when only a few NFEs are used, or struggle with training instability. In this paper, we proposed Integration Flow, which directly learns the integral of ODE-based trajectory paths without solving the ODE functions. Moreover, Integration Flow explicitly incorporates the target state $\mathbf{x}_0$ as the anchor state in guiding the reverse-time dynamics. We have theoretically proven this can contribute to both stability and accuracy. To the best of our knowledge, Integration Flow is the first model with a unified structure to estimate ODE-based generative models and the first to show the exact straightness of 1-Rectified Flow without reflow. Through theoretical analysis and empirical evaluations, we show that Integration Flows achieve improved performance when it is applied to existing ODE-based models, such as diffusion models, Rectified Flows, and PFGM++. Specifically, Integration Flow achieves one-step generation on CIFAR10 with FIDs of 2.86 for the Variance Exploding (VE) diffusion model, 3.36 for rectified flow without reflow, and 2.91 for PFGM++; and on ImageNet with FIDs of 4.09 for VE diffusion model, 4.35 for rectified flow without reflow and 4.15 for PFGM++.
2025-04-28T18:29:15Z
Jingjing Wang
Dan Zhang
Joshua Luo
Yin Yang
Feng Luo
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20199v1
Weaving Context Across Images: Improving Vision-Language Models through Focus-Centric Visual Chains
2025-04-28T19:02:18Z
Vision-language models (VLMs) achieve remarkable success in single-image tasks. However, real-world scenarios often involve intricate multi-image inputs, leading to a notable performance decline as models struggle to disentangle critical information scattered across complex visual features. In this work, we propose Focus-Centric Visual Chain, a novel paradigm that enhances VLMs'perception, comprehension, and reasoning abilities in multi-image scenarios. To facilitate this paradigm, we propose Focus-Centric Data Synthesis, a scalable bottom-up approach for synthesizing high-quality data with elaborate reasoning paths. Through this approach, We construct VISC-150K, a large-scale dataset with reasoning data in the form of Focus-Centric Visual Chain, specifically designed for multi-image tasks. Experimental results on seven multi-image benchmarks demonstrate that our method achieves average performance gains of 3.16% and 2.24% across two distinct model architectures, without compromising the general vision-language capabilities. our study represents a significant step toward more robust and capable vision-language systems that can handle complex visual scenarios.
2025-04-28T19:02:18Z
Juntian Zhang
Chuanqi cheng
Yuhan Liu
Wei Liu
Jian Luan
Rui Yan
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20220v1
A Multimodal Pipeline for Clinical Data Extraction: Applying Vision-Language Models to Scans of Transfusion Reaction Reports
2025-04-28T19:40:28Z
Despite the growing adoption of electronic health records, many processes still rely on paper documents, reflecting the heterogeneous real-world conditions in which healthcare is delivered. The manual transcription process is time-consuming and prone to errors when transferring paper-based data to digital formats. To streamline this workflow, this study presents an open-source pipeline that extracts and categorizes checkbox data from scanned documents. Demonstrated on transfusion reaction reports, the design supports adaptation to other checkbox-rich document types. The proposed method integrates checkbox detection, multilingual optical character recognition (OCR) and multilingual vision-language models (VLMs). The pipeline achieves high precision and recall compared against annually compiled gold-standards from 2017 to 2024. The result is a reduction in administrative workload and accurate regulatory reporting. The open-source availability of this pipeline encourages self-hosted parsing of checkbox forms.
2025-04-28T19:40:28Z
Henning Schäfer
Cynthia S. Schmidt
Johannes Wutzkowsky
Kamil Lorek
Lea Reinartz
Johannes Rückert
Christian Temme
Britta Böckmann
Peter A. Horn
Christoph M. Friedrich
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20241v1
Physics-Informed Diffusion Models for SAR Ship Wake Generation from Text Prompts
2025-04-28T20:21:05Z
Detecting ship presence via wake signatures in SAR imagery is attracting considerable research interest, but limited annotated data availability poses significant challenges for supervised learning. Physics-based simulations are commonly used to address this data scarcity, although they are slow and constrain end-to-end learning. In this work, we explore a new direction for more efficient and end-to-end SAR ship wake simulation using a diffusion model trained on data generated by a physics-based simulator. The training dataset is built by pairing images produced by the simulator with text prompts derived from simulation parameters. Experimental result show that the model generates realistic Kelvin wake patterns and achieves significantly faster inference than the physics-based simulator. These results highlight the potential of diffusion models for fast and controllable wake image generation, opening new possibilities for end-to-end downstream tasks in maritime SAR analysis.
2025-04-28T20:21:05Z
4 pages; Submitted Machine Intelligence for GeoAnalytics and Remote Sensing (MIGARS) - 2025
Kamirul Kamirul
Odysseas Pappas
Alin Achim
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20277v3
Generative Diffusion Models for Resource Allocation in Wireless Networks
2025-09-21T21:37:20Z
This paper proposes a supervised training algorithm for learning stochastic resource allocation policies with generative diffusion models (GDMs). We formulate the allocation problem as the maximization of an ergodic utility function subject to ergodic Quality of Service (QoS) constraints. Given samples from a stochastic expert policy that yields a near-optimal solution to the constrained optimization problem, we train a GDM policy to imitate the expert and generate new samples from the optimal distribution. We achieve near-optimal performance through the sequential execution of the generated samples. To enable generalization to a family of network configurations, we parameterize the backward diffusion process with a graph neural network (GNN) architecture. We present numerical results in a case study of power control.
2025-04-28T21:44:31Z
Accepted to 2025 IEEE International Workshop on Computational Advances in Multi-Sensor Adaptive Processing (CAMSAP'25)
Yigit Berkay Uslu
Samar Hadou
Shirin Saeedi Bidokhti
Alejandro Ribeiro
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20288v1
Image Interpolation with Score-based Riemannian Metrics of Diffusion Models
2025-04-28T22:04:20Z
Diffusion models excel in content generation by implicitly learning the data manifold, yet they lack a practical method to leverage this manifold - unlike other deep generative models equipped with latent spaces. This paper introduces a novel framework that treats the data space of pre-trained diffusion models as a Riemannian manifold, with a metric derived from the score function. Experiments with MNIST and Stable Diffusion show that this geometry-aware approach yields image interpolations that are more realistic, less noisy, and more faithful to prompts than existing methods, demonstrating its potential for improved content generation and editing.
2025-04-28T22:04:20Z
Shinnosuke Saito
Takashi Matsubara
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20303v2
DeepAndes: A Self-Supervised Vision Foundation Model for Multi-Spectral Remote Sensing Imagery of the Andes
2025-11-09T02:43:29Z
By mapping sites at large scales using remotely sensed data, archaeologists can generate unique insights into long-term demographic trends, inter-regional social networks, and past adaptations to climate change. Remote sensing surveys complement field-based approaches, and their reach can be especially great when combined with deep learning and computer vision techniques. However, conventional supervised deep learning methods face challenges in annotating fine-grained archaeological features at scale. While recent vision foundation models have shown remarkable success in learning large-scale remote sensing data with minimal annotations, most off-the-shelf solutions are designed for RGB images rather than multi-spectral satellite imagery, such as the 8-band data used in our study. In this paper, we introduce DeepAndes, a transformer-based vision foundation model trained on three million multi-spectral satellite images, specifically tailored for Andean archaeology. DeepAndes incorporates a customized DINOv2 self-supervised learning algorithm optimized for 8-band multi-spectral imagery, marking the first foundation model designed explicitly for the Andes region. We evaluate its image understanding performance through imbalanced image classification, image instance retrieval, and pixel-level semantic segmentation tasks. Our experiments show that DeepAndes achieves superior F1 scores, mean average precision, and Dice scores in few-shot learning scenarios, significantly outperforming models trained from scratch or pre-trained on smaller datasets. This underscores the effectiveness of large-scale self-supervised pre-training in archaeological remote sensing. Codes will be available on https://github.com/geopacha/DeepAndes.
2025-04-28T23:15:09Z
10.1109/JSTARS.2025.3619423
Junlin Guo
James R. Zimmer-Dauphinee
Jordan M. Nieusma
Siqi Lu
Quan Liu
Ruining Deng
Can Cui
Jialin Yue
Yizhe Lin
Tianyuan Yao
Juming Xiong
Junchao Zhu
Chongyu Qu
Yuechen Yang
Mitchell Wilkes
Xiao Wang
Parker VanValkenburgh
Steven A. Wernke
Yuankai Huo
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20343v1
MicarVLMoE: A Modern Gated Cross-Aligned Vision-Language Mixture of Experts Model for Medical Image Captioning and Report Generation
2025-04-29T01:26:02Z
Medical image reporting (MIR) aims to generate structured clinical descriptions from radiological images. Existing methods struggle with fine-grained feature extraction, multimodal alignment, and generalization across diverse imaging types, often relying on vanilla transformers and focusing primarily on chest X-rays. We propose MicarVLMoE, a vision-language mixture-of-experts model with gated cross-aligned fusion, designed to address these limitations. Our architecture includes: (i) a multiscale vision encoder (MSVE) for capturing anatomical details at varying resolutions, (ii) a multihead dual-branch latent attention (MDLA) module for vision-language alignment through latent bottleneck representations, and (iii) a modulated mixture-of-experts (MoE) decoder for adaptive expert specialization. We extend MIR to CT scans, retinal imaging, MRI scans, and gross pathology images, reporting state-of-the-art results on COVCTR, MMR, PGROSS, and ROCO datasets. Extensive experiments and ablations confirm improved clinical accuracy, cross-modal alignment, and model interpretability. Code is available at https://github.com/AI-14/micar-vl-moe.
2025-04-29T01:26:02Z
Accepted by IJCNN 2025, 8 pages, 8 figures, 3 tables
Amaan Izhar
Nurul Japar
Norisma Idris
Ting Dang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20384v1
FiLA-Video: Spatio-Temporal Compression for Fine-Grained Long Video Understanding
2025-04-29T03:09:46Z
Recent advancements in video understanding within visual large language models (VLLMs) have led to notable progress. However, the complexity of video data and contextual processing limitations still hinder long-video comprehension. A common approach is video feature compression to reduce token input to large language models, yet many methods either fail to prioritize essential features, leading to redundant inter-frame information, or introduce computationally expensive modules.To address these issues, we propose FiLA(Fine-grained Vision Language Model)-Video, a novel framework that leverages a lightweight dynamic-weight multi-frame fusion strategy, which adaptively integrates multiple frames into a single representation while preserving key video information and reducing computational costs. To enhance frame selection for fusion, we introduce a keyframe selection strategy, effectively identifying informative frames from a larger pool for improved summarization. Additionally, we present a simple yet effective long-video training data generation strategy, boosting model performance without extensive manual annotation. Experimental results demonstrate that FiLA-Video achieves superior efficiency and accuracy in long-video comprehension compared to existing methods.
2025-04-29T03:09:46Z
8 pages, 6 figures
Yanan Guo
Wenhui Dong
Jun Song
Shiding Zhu
Xuan Zhang
Hanqing Yang
Yingbo Wang
Yang Du
Xianing Chen
Bo Zheng
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20411v1
ADiff4TPP: Asynchronous Diffusion Models for Temporal Point Processes
2025-04-29T04:17:39Z
This work introduces a novel approach to modeling temporal point processes using diffusion models with an asynchronous noise schedule. At each step of the diffusion process, the noise schedule injects noise of varying scales into different parts of the data. With a careful design of the noise schedules, earlier events are generated faster than later ones, thus providing stronger conditioning for forecasting the more distant future. We derive an objective to effectively train these models for a general family of noise schedules based on conditional flow matching. Our method models the joint distribution of the latent representations of events in a sequence and achieves state-of-the-art results in predicting both the next inter-event time and event type on benchmark datasets. Additionally, it flexibly accommodates varying lengths of observation and prediction windows in different forecasting settings by adjusting the starting and ending points of the generation process. Finally, our method shows superior performance in long-horizon prediction tasks, outperforming existing baseline methods.
2025-04-29T04:17:39Z
Amartya Mukherjee
Ruizhi Deng
He Zhao
Yuzhen Mao
Leonid Sigal
Frederick Tung
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20419v1
Plant Disease Detection through Multimodal Large Language Models and Convolutional Neural Networks
2025-04-29T04:31:58Z
Automation in agriculture plays a vital role in addressing challenges related to crop monitoring and disease management, particularly through early detection systems. This study investigates the effectiveness of combining multimodal Large Language Models (LLMs), specifically GPT-4o, with Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) for automated plant disease classification using leaf imagery. Leveraging the PlantVillage dataset, we systematically evaluate model performance across zero-shot, few-shot, and progressive fine-tuning scenarios. A comparative analysis between GPT-4o and the widely used ResNet-50 model was conducted across three resolutions (100, 150, and 256 pixels) and two plant species (apple and corn). Results indicate that fine-tuned GPT-4o models achieved slightly better performance compared to the performance of ResNet-50, achieving up to 98.12% classification accuracy on apple leaf images, compared to 96.88% achieved by ResNet-50, with improved generalization and near-zero training loss. However, zero-shot performance of GPT-4o was significantly lower, underscoring the need for minimal training. Additional evaluations on cross-resolution and cross-plant generalization revealed the models' adaptability and limitations when applied to new domains. The findings highlight the promise of integrating multimodal LLMs into automated disease detection pipelines, enhancing the scalability and intelligence of precision agriculture systems while reducing the dependence on large, labeled datasets and high-resolution sensor infrastructure. Large Language Models, Vision Language Models, LLMs and CNNs, Disease Detection with Vision Language Models, VLMs
2025-04-29T04:31:58Z
Konstantinos I. Roumeliotis
Ranjan Sapkota
Manoj Karkee
Nikolaos D. Tselikas
Dimitrios K. Nasiopoulos
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20456v1
Reviving Any-Subset Autoregressive Models with Principled Parallel Sampling and Speculative Decoding
2025-04-29T06:33:13Z
In arbitrary-order language models, it is an open question how to sample tokens in parallel from the correct joint distribution. With discrete diffusion models, the more tokens they generate in parallel, the less their predicted distributions adhere to the originally learned data distribution, as they rely on a conditional independence assumption that only works with infinitesimally small timesteps. We find that a different class of models, any-subset autoregressive models (AS-ARMs), holds the solution. As implied by the name, AS-ARMs can generate tokens in any order, and in parallel. Moreover, AS-ARMs support parallelized joint probability density estimation, allowing them to correct their own parallel-generated token distributions, via our Any-Subset Speculative Decoding (ASSD) algorithm. ASSD provably enables generation of tokens from the correct joint distribution, with the number of neural network calls upper bounded by the number of tokens predicted. We empirically verify that ASSD speeds up language generation, without sacrificing quality. Furthermore, we provide a mathematically justified scheme for training AS-ARMs for generation, and show that AS-ARMs achieve state-of-the-art performance among sub-200M parameter models on infilling benchmark tasks, and nearly match the performance of models 50X larger on code generation. Our theoretical and empirical results indicate that the once-forgotten AS-ARMs are a promising direction of language modeling.
2025-04-29T06:33:13Z
Gabe Guo
Stefano Ermon
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20468v2
Antidote: A Unified Framework for Mitigating LVLM Hallucinations in Counterfactual Presupposition and Object Perception
2025-05-07T08:03:08Z
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved impressive results across various cross-modal tasks. However, hallucinations, i.e., the models generating counterfactual responses, remain a challenge. Though recent studies have attempted to alleviate object perception hallucinations, they focus on the models' response generation, and overlooking the task question itself. This paper discusses the vulnerability of LVLMs in solving counterfactual presupposition questions (CPQs), where the models are prone to accept the presuppositions of counterfactual objects and produce severe hallucinatory responses. To this end, we introduce "Antidote", a unified, synthetic data-driven post-training framework for mitigating both types of hallucination above. It leverages synthetic data to incorporate factual priors into questions to achieve self-correction, and decouple the mitigation process into a preference optimization problem. Furthermore, we construct "CP-Bench", a novel benchmark to evaluate LVLMs' ability to correctly handle CPQs and produce factual responses. Applied to the LLaVA series, Antidote can simultaneously enhance performance on CP-Bench by over 50%, POPE by 1.8-3.3%, and CHAIR & SHR by 30-50%, all without relying on external supervision from stronger LVLMs or human feedback and introducing noticeable catastrophic forgetting issues.
2025-04-29T07:05:24Z
Accepted to CVPR 2025
Yuanchen Wu
Lu Zhang
Hang Yao
Junlong Du
Ke Yan
Shouhong Ding
Yunsheng Wu
Xiaoqiang Li
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20501v1
SAM-Guided Robust Representation Learning for One-Shot 3D Medical Image Segmentation
2025-04-29T07:43:37Z
One-shot medical image segmentation (MIS) is crucial for medical analysis due to the burden of medical experts on manual annotation. The recent emergence of the segment anything model (SAM) has demonstrated remarkable adaptation in MIS but cannot be directly applied to one-shot medical image segmentation (MIS) due to its reliance on labor-intensive user interactions and the high computational cost. To cope with these limitations, we propose a novel SAM-guided robust representation learning framework, named RRL-MedSAM, to adapt SAM to one-shot 3D MIS, which exploits the strong generalization capabilities of the SAM encoder to learn better feature representation. We devise a dual-stage knowledge distillation (DSKD) strategy to distill general knowledge between natural and medical images from the foundation model to train a lightweight encoder, and then adopt a mutual exponential moving average (mutual-EMA) to update the weights of the general lightweight encoder and medical-specific encoder. Specifically, pseudo labels from the registration network are used to perform mutual supervision for such two encoders. Moreover, we introduce an auto-prompting (AP) segmentation decoder which adopts the mask generated from the general lightweight model as a prompt to assist the medical-specific model in boosting the final segmentation performance. Extensive experiments conducted on three public datasets, i.e., OASIS, CT-lung demonstrate that the proposed RRL-MedSAM outperforms state-of-the-art one-shot MIS methods for both segmentation and registration tasks. Especially, our lightweight encoder uses only 3\% of the parameters compared to the encoder of SAM-Base.
2025-04-29T07:43:37Z
Jia Wang
Yunan Mei
Jiarui Liu
Xin Fan
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20518v3
Dynamic Attention Analysis for Backdoor Detection in Text-to-Image Diffusion Models
2025-12-01T06:19:48Z
Recent studies have revealed that text-to-image diffusion models are vulnerable to backdoor attacks, where attackers implant stealthy textual triggers to manipulate model outputs. Previous backdoor detection methods primarily focus on the static features of backdoor samples. However, a vital property of diffusion models is their inherent dynamism. This study introduces a novel backdoor detection perspective named Dynamic Attention Analysis (DAA), showing that these dynamic characteristics serve as better indicators for backdoor detection. Specifically, by examining the dynamic evolution of cross-attention maps, we observe that backdoor samples exhibit distinct feature evolution patterns at the $<$EOS$>$ token compared to benign samples. To quantify these dynamic anomalies, we first introduce DAA-I, which treats the tokens' attention maps as spatially independent and measures dynamic feature using the Frobenius norm. Furthermore, to better capture the interactions between attention maps and refine the feature, we propose a dynamical system-based approach, referred to as DAA-S. This model formulates the spatial correlations among attention maps using a graph-based state equation and we theoretically analyze the global asymptotic stability of this method. Extensive experiments across six representative backdoor attack scenarios demonstrate that our approach significantly surpasses existing detection methods, achieving an average F1 Score of 79.27% and an AUC of 86.27%. The code is available at https://github.com/Robin-WZQ/DAA.
2025-04-29T07:59:35Z
Accepted by TPAMI
Zhongqi Wang
Jie Zhang
Shiguang Shan
Xilin Chen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20520v1
PRISM: Projection-based Reward Integration for Scene-Aware Real-to-Sim-to-Real Transfer with Few Demonstrations
2025-04-29T08:01:27Z
Learning from few demonstrations to develop policies robust to variations in robot initial positions and object poses is a problem of significant practical interest in robotics. Compared to imitation learning, which often struggles to generalize from limited samples, reinforcement learning (RL) can autonomously explore to obtain robust behaviors. Training RL agents through direct interaction with the real world is often impractical and unsafe, while building simulation environments requires extensive manual effort, such as designing scenes and crafting task-specific reward functions. To address these challenges, we propose an integrated real-to-sim-to-real pipeline that constructs simulation environments based on expert demonstrations by identifying scene objects from images and retrieving their corresponding 3D models from existing libraries. We introduce a projection-based reward model for RL policy training that is supervised by a vision-language model (VLM) using human-guided object projection relationships as prompts, with the policy further fine-tuned using expert demonstrations. In general, our work focuses on the construction of simulation environments and RL-based policy training, ultimately enabling the deployment of reliable robotic control policies in real-world scenarios.
2025-04-29T08:01:27Z
Haowen Sun
Han Wang
Chengzhong Ma
Shaolong Zhang
Jiawei Ye
Xingyu Chen
Xuguang Lan
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21063v1
Token-Level Prompt Mixture with Parameter-Free Routing for Federated Domain Generalization
2025-04-29T11:06:03Z
Federated domain generalization (FedDG) aims to learn a globally generalizable model from decentralized clients with heterogeneous data while preserving privacy. Recent studies have introduced prompt learning to adapt vision-language models (VLMs) in FedDG by learning a single global prompt. However, such a one-prompt-fits-all learning paradigm typically leads to performance degradation on personalized samples. Although the mixture of experts (MoE) offers a promising solution for specialization, existing MoE-based methods suffer from coarse image-level expert assignment and high communication costs from parameterized routers. To address these limitations, we propose TRIP, a Token-level prompt mixture with parameter-free routing framework for FedDG, which treats multiple prompts as distinct experts. Unlike existing image-level routing designs, TRIP assigns different tokens within an image to specific experts. To ensure communication efficiency, TRIP incorporates a parameter-free routing mechanism based on token clustering and optimal transport. The instance-specific prompt is then synthesized by aggregating experts, weighted by the number of tokens assigned to each. Additionally, TRIP develops an unbiased learning strategy for prompt experts, leveraging the VLM's zero-shot generalization capability. Extensive experiments across four benchmarks demonstrate that TRIP achieves optimal generalization results, with communication of only 1K parameters per round. Our code is available at https://github.com/GongShuai8210/TRIP.
2025-04-29T11:06:03Z
The manuscript has been submitted to IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
Shuai Gong
Chaoran Cui
Xiaolin Dong
Xiushan Nie
Lei Zhu
Xiaojun Chang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20645v1
LDPoly: Latent Diffusion for Polygonal Road Outline Extraction in Large-Scale Topographic Mapping
2025-04-29T11:13:33Z
Polygonal road outline extraction from high-resolution aerial images is an important task in large-scale topographic mapping, where roads are represented as vectorized polygons, capturing essential geometric features with minimal vertex redundancy. Despite its importance, no existing method has been explicitly designed for this task. While polygonal building outline extraction has been extensively studied, the unique characteristics of roads, such as branching structures and topological connectivity, pose challenges to these methods. To address this gap, we introduce LDPoly, the first dedicated framework for extracting polygonal road outlines from high-resolution aerial images. Our method leverages a novel Dual-Latent Diffusion Model with a Channel-Embedded Fusion Module, enabling the model to simultaneously generate road masks and vertex heatmaps. A tailored polygonization method is then applied to obtain accurate vectorized road polygons with minimal vertex redundancy. We evaluate LDPoly on a new benchmark dataset, Map2ImLas, which contains detailed polygonal annotations for various topographic objects in several Dutch regions. Our experiments include both in-region and cross-region evaluations, with the latter designed to assess the model's generalization performance on unseen regions. Quantitative and qualitative results demonstrate that LDPoly outperforms state-of-the-art polygon extraction methods across various metrics, including pixel-level coverage, vertex efficiency, polygon regularity, and road connectivity. We also design two new metrics to assess polygon simplicity and boundary smoothness. Moreover, this work represents the first application of diffusion models for extracting precise vectorized object outlines without redundant vertices from remote-sensing imagery, paving the way for future advancements in this field.
2025-04-29T11:13:33Z
Weiqin Jiao
Hao Cheng
George Vosselman
Claudio Persello
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20648v1
SpaRE: Enhancing Spatial Reasoning in Vision-Language Models with Synthetic Data
2025-04-29T11:18:38Z
Vision-language models (VLMs) work well in tasks ranging from image captioning to visual question answering (VQA), yet they struggle with spatial reasoning, a key skill for understanding our physical world that humans excel at. We find that spatial relations are generally rare in widely used VL datasets, with only a few being well represented, while most form a long tail of underrepresented relations. This gap leaves VLMs ill-equipped to handle diverse spatial relationships. To bridge it, we construct a synthetic VQA dataset focused on spatial reasoning generated from hyper-detailed image descriptions in Localized Narratives, DOCCI, and PixMo-Cap. Our dataset consists of 455k samples containing 3.4 million QA pairs. Trained on this dataset, our Spatial-Reasoning Enhanced (SpaRE) VLMs show strong improvements on spatial reasoning benchmarks, achieving up to a 49% performance gain on the What's Up benchmark, while maintaining strong results on general tasks. Our work narrows the gap between human and VLM spatial reasoning and makes VLMs more capable in real-world tasks such as robotics and navigation.
2025-04-29T11:18:38Z
Michael Ogezi
Freda Shi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20669v1
Advance Fake Video Detection via Vision Transformers
2025-04-29T11:51:07Z
Recent advancements in AI-based multimedia generation have enabled the creation of hyper-realistic images and videos, raising concerns about their potential use in spreading misinformation. The widespread accessibility of generative techniques, which allow for the production of fake multimedia from prompts or existing media, along with their continuous refinement, underscores the urgent need for highly accurate and generalizable AI-generated media detection methods, underlined also by new regulations like the European Digital AI Act. In this paper, we draw inspiration from Vision Transformer (ViT)-based fake image detection and extend this idea to video. We propose an {original} %innovative framework that effectively integrates ViT embeddings over time to enhance detection performance. Our method shows promising accuracy, generalization, and few-shot learning capabilities across a new, large and diverse dataset of videos generated using five open source generative techniques from the state-of-the-art, as well as a separate dataset containing videos produced by proprietary generative methods.
2025-04-29T11:51:07Z
Joy Battocchio
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
Stefano Dell'Anna
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
Andrea Montibeller
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
Giulia Boato
University of Trento, Trento, Italy
Truebees srl, Trento, Italy
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21065v1
A 3D pocket-aware and affinity-guided diffusion model for lead optimization
2025-04-29T11:52:42Z
Molecular optimization, aimed at improving binding affinity or other molecular properties, is a crucial task in drug discovery that often relies on the expertise of medicinal chemists. Recently, deep learning-based 3D generative models showed promise in enhancing the efficiency of molecular optimization. However, these models often struggle to adequately consider binding affinities with protein targets during lead optimization. Herein, we propose a 3D pocket-aware and affinity-guided diffusion model, named Diffleop, to optimize molecules with enhanced binding affinity. The model explicitly incorporates the knowledge of protein-ligand binding affinity to guide the denoising sampling for molecule generation with high affinity. The comprehensive evaluations indicated that Diffleop outperforms baseline models across multiple metrics, especially in terms of binding affinity.
2025-04-29T11:52:42Z
Anjie Qiao
Junjie Xie
Weifeng Huang
Hao Zhang
Jiahua Rao
Shuangjia Zheng
Yuedong Yang
Zhen Wang
Guo-Bo Li
Jinping Lei
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20754v1
DDPS: Discrete Diffusion Posterior Sampling for Paths in Layered Graphs
2025-04-29T13:34:17Z
Diffusion models form an important class of generative models today, accounting for much of the state of the art in cutting edge AI research. While numerous extensions beyond image and video generation exist, few of such approaches address the issue of explicit constraints in the samples generated. In this paper, we study the problem of generating paths in a layered graph (a variant of a directed acyclic graph) using discrete diffusion models, while guaranteeing that our generated samples are indeed paths. Our approach utilizes a simple yet effective representation for paths which we call the padded adjacency-list matrix (PALM). In addition, we show how to effectively perform classifier guidance, which helps steer the sampled paths to specific preferred edges without any retraining of the diffusion model. Our preliminary results show that empirically, our method outperforms alternatives which do not explicitly account for path constraints.
2025-04-29T13:34:17Z
To appear at Frontiers in Probabilistic Inference: Sampling meets Learning (FPI) workshop at ICLR 2025. https://openreview.net/forum?id=DBdkU0Ikzy
Hao Luan
See-Kiong Ng
Chun Kai Ling
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20770v1
JTreeformer: Graph-Transformer via Latent-Diffusion Model for Molecular Generation
2025-04-29T13:51:07Z
The discovery of new molecules based on the original chemical molecule distributions is of great importance in medicine. The graph transformer, with its advantages of high performance and scalability compared to traditional graph networks, has been widely explored in recent research for applications of graph structures. However, current transformer-based graph decoders struggle to effectively utilize graph information, which limits their capacity to leverage only sequences of nodes rather than the complex topological structures of molecule graphs. This paper focuses on building a graph transformer-based framework for molecular generation, which we call \textbf{JTreeformer} as it transforms graph generation into junction tree generation. It combines GCN parallel with multi-head attention as the encoder. It integrates a directed acyclic GCN into a graph-based Transformer to serve as a decoder, which can iteratively synthesize the entire molecule by leveraging information from the partially constructed molecular structure at each step. In addition, a diffusion model is inserted in the latent space generated by the encoder, to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of sampling further. The empirical results demonstrate that our novel framework outperforms existing molecule generation methods, thus offering a promising tool to advance drug discovery (https://anonymous.4open.science/r/JTreeformer-C74C).
2025-04-29T13:51:07Z
9 pages, 6figures
Ji Shi
Chengxun Xie
Zhonghao Li
Xinming Zhang
Miao Zhang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20808v2
SoccerDiffusion: Toward Learning End-to-End Humanoid Robot Soccer from Gameplay Recordings
2025-07-03T12:26:15Z
This paper introduces SoccerDiffusion, a transformer-based diffusion model designed to learn end-to-end control policies for humanoid robot soccer directly from real-world gameplay recordings. Using data collected from RoboCup competitions, the model predicts joint command trajectories from multi-modal sensor inputs, including vision, proprioception, and game state. We employ a distillation technique to enable real-time inference on embedded platforms that reduces the multi-step diffusion process to a single step. Our results demonstrate the model's ability to replicate complex motion behaviors such as walking, kicking, and fall recovery both in simulation and on physical robots. Although high-level tactical behavior remains limited, this work provides a robust foundation for subsequent reinforcement learning or preference optimization methods. We release the dataset, pretrained models, and code under: https://bit-bots.github.io/SoccerDiffusion
2025-04-29T14:21:08Z
Florian Vahl
Jörn Griepenburg
Jan Gutsche
Jasper Güldenstein
Jianwei Zhang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20860v2
FedMVP: Federated Multimodal Visual Prompt Tuning for Vision-Language Models
2025-09-02T12:40:43Z
In federated learning, textual prompt tuning adapts Vision-Language Models (e.g., CLIP) by tuning lightweight input tokens (or prompts) on local client data, while keeping network weights frozen. After training, only the prompts are shared by the clients with the central server for aggregation. However, textual prompt tuning suffers from overfitting to known concepts, limiting its generalizability to unseen concepts. To address this limitation, we propose Multimodal Visual Prompt Tuning (FedMVP) that conditions the prompts on multimodal contextual information - derived from the input image and textual attribute features of a class. At the core of FedMVP is a PromptFormer module that synergistically aligns textual and visual features through a cross-attention mechanism. The dynamically generated multimodal visual prompts are then input to the frozen vision encoder of CLIP, and trained with a combination of CLIP similarity loss and a consistency loss. Extensive evaluation on 20 datasets, spanning three generalization settings, demonstrates that FedMVP not only preserves performance on in-distribution classes and domains, but also displays higher generalizability to unseen classes and domains, surpassing state-of-the-art methods by a notable margin of +1.57% - 2.26%. Code is available at https://github.com/mainaksingha01/FedMVP.
2025-04-29T15:36:51Z
Accepted in ICCV 2025
Mainak Singha
Subhankar Roy
Sarthak Mehrotra
Ankit Jha
Moloud Abdar
Biplab Banerjee
Elisa Ricci
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20865v3
AI-GenBench: A New Ongoing Benchmark for AI-Generated Image Detection
2025-12-16T18:11:21Z
The rapid advancement of generative AI has revolutionized image creation, enabling high-quality synthesis from text prompts while raising critical challenges for media authenticity. We present Ai-GenBench, a novel benchmark designed to address the urgent need for robust detection of AI-generated images in real-world scenarios. Unlike existing solutions that evaluate models on static datasets, Ai-GenBench introduces a temporal evaluation framework where detection methods are incrementally trained on synthetic images, historically ordered by their generative models, to test their ability to generalize to new generative models, such as the transition from GANs to diffusion models. Our benchmark focuses on high-quality, diverse visual content and overcomes key limitations of current approaches, including arbitrary dataset splits, unfair comparisons, and excessive computational demands. Ai-GenBench provides a comprehensive dataset, a standardized evaluation protocol, and accessible tools for both researchers and non-experts (e.g., journalists, fact-checkers), ensuring reproducibility while maintaining practical training requirements. By establishing clear evaluation rules and controlled augmentation strategies, Ai-GenBench enables meaningful comparison of detection methods and scalable solutions. Code and data are publicly available to ensure reproducibility and to support the development of robust forensic detectors to keep pace with the rise of new synthetic generators.
2025-04-29T15:41:13Z
Accepted at Verimedia workshop, IJCNN 2025. 9 pages, 6 figures, 4 tables, code available: https://github.com/MI-BioLab/AI-GenBench
Lorenzo Pellegrini
Davide Cozzolino
Serafino Pandolfini
Davide Maltoni
Matteo Ferrara
Luisa Verdoliva
Marco Prati
Marco Ramilli
10.1109/IJCNN64981.2025.11228377
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21072v4
Erased but Not Forgotten: How Backdoors Compromise Concept Erasure
2026-10-03T09:21:28Z
The expansion of text-to-image diffusion models has raised concerns about harmful outputs, from fabricated depictions of public figures to sexually explicit imagery. To mitigate such risks, prior work has proposed concept erasure methods that aim to sever unwanted concepts from the model via fine-tuning, yet it remains unclear whether these approaches truly remove all links to the harmful concept or merely conceal superficial connections. In this work, we reveal a critical vulnerability, the Erasure Evasion Backdoor (EEB): an adversary binds a backdoor trigger to a concept slated for removal, and this malicious link survives subsequent erasure. We show that both black-box and white-box adversaries can instantiate this threat. Across six state-of-the-art erasure methods, including robust ones that explicitly search for alternative representations of the target concept, EEB consistently exposes harmful content: up to 82% success against celebrity-identity unlearning, up to 94% for object erasure, and up to 16 times amplification of explicit-content exposure. While EEB uncovers a blind spot in current erasure methods, it also provides a diagnostic tool for stress-testing future concept erasure techniques. Our code is available at https://github.com/multimodal-ai-lab/EEB.
2025-04-29T16:13:06Z
Code and checkpoints: https://github.com/multimodal-ai-lab/EEB
Tobias Braun
Jonas Henry Grebe
Patrick Mohr
Marcus Rohrbach
Anna Rohrbach
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20930v2
ChestX-Reasoner: Advancing Radiology Foundation Models with Reasoning through Step-by-Step Verification
2025-05-21T08:50:11Z
Recent advances in reasoning-enhanced large language models (LLMs) and multimodal LLMs (MLLMs) have significantly improved performance in complex tasks, yet medical AI models often overlook the structured reasoning processes inherent in clinical practice. In this work, we present ChestX-Reasoner, a radiology diagnosis MLLM designed to leverage process supervision mined directly from clinical reports, reflecting the step-by-step reasoning followed by radiologists. We construct a large dataset by extracting and refining reasoning chains from routine radiology reports. Our two-stage training framework combines supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning guided by process rewards to better align model reasoning with clinical standards. We introduce RadRBench-CXR, a comprehensive benchmark featuring 59K visual question answering samples with 301K clinically validated reasoning steps, and propose RadRScore, a metric evaluating reasoning factuality, completeness, and effectiveness. ChestX-Reasoner outperforms existing medical and general-domain MLLMs in both diagnostic accuracy and reasoning ability, achieving 16%, 5.9%, and 18% improvements in reasoning ability compared to the best medical MLLM, the best general MLLM, and its base model, respectively, as well as 3.3%, 24%, and 27% improvements in outcome accuracy. All resources are open-sourced to facilitate further research in medical reasoning MLLMs.
2025-04-29T16:48:23Z
Ziqing Fan
Cheng Liang
Chaoyi Wu
Ya Zhang
Yanfeng Wang
Weidi Xie
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20995v1
TesserAct: Learning 4D Embodied World Models
2025-04-29T17:59:30Z
This paper presents an effective approach for learning novel 4D embodied world models, which predict the dynamic evolution of 3D scenes over time in response to an embodied agent's actions, providing both spatial and temporal consistency. We propose to learn a 4D world model by training on RGB-DN (RGB, Depth, and Normal) videos. This not only surpasses traditional 2D models by incorporating detailed shape, configuration, and temporal changes into their predictions, but also allows us to effectively learn accurate inverse dynamic models for an embodied agent. Specifically, we first extend existing robotic manipulation video datasets with depth and normal information leveraging off-the-shelf models. Next, we fine-tune a video generation model on this annotated dataset, which jointly predicts RGB-DN (RGB, Depth, and Normal) for each frame. We then present an algorithm to directly convert generated RGB, Depth, and Normal videos into a high-quality 4D scene of the world. Our method ensures temporal and spatial coherence in 4D scene predictions from embodied scenarios, enables novel view synthesis for embodied environments, and facilitates policy learning that significantly outperforms those derived from prior video-based world models.
2025-04-29T17:59:30Z
Project Page: https://tesseractworld.github.io/
Haoyu Zhen
Qiao Sun
Hongxin Zhang
Junyan Li
Siyuan Zhou
Yilun Du
Chuang Gan
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21099v1
A Survey on Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning for Foundation Models in Federated Learning
2025-04-29T18:18:39Z
Foundation models have revolutionized artificial intelligence by providing robust, versatile architectures pre-trained on large-scale datasets. However, adapting these massive models to specific downstream tasks requires fine-tuning, which can be prohibitively expensive in computational resources. Parameter-Efficient Fine-Tuning (PEFT) methods address this challenge by selectively updating only a small subset of parameters. Meanwhile, Federated Learning (FL) enables collaborative model training across distributed clients without sharing raw data, making it ideal for privacy-sensitive applications. This survey provides a comprehensive review of the integration of PEFT techniques within federated learning environments. We systematically categorize existing approaches into three main groups: Additive PEFT (which introduces new trainable parameters), Selective PEFT (which fine-tunes only subsets of existing parameters), and Reparameterized PEFT (which transforms model architectures to enable efficient updates). For each category, we analyze how these methods address the unique challenges of federated settings, including data heterogeneity, communication efficiency, computational constraints, and privacy concerns. We further organize the literature based on application domains, covering both natural language processing and computer vision tasks. Finally, we discuss promising research directions, including scaling to larger foundation models, theoretical analysis of federated PEFT methods, and sustainable approaches for resource-constrained environments.
2025-04-29T18:18:39Z
survey paper, under updating
Jieming Bian
Yuanzhe Peng
Lei Wang
Yin Huang
Jie Xu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21186v2
GLIP-OOD: Zero-Shot Graph OOD Detection with Graph Foundation Model
2025-05-17T01:21:19Z
Out-of-distribution (OOD) detection is critical for ensuring the safety and reliability of machine learning systems, particularly in dynamic and open-world environments. In the vision and text domains, zero-shot OOD detection - which requires no training on in-distribution (ID) data - has advanced significantly through the use of large-scale pretrained models, such as vision-language models (VLMs) and large language models (LLMs). However, zero-shot OOD detection in graph-structured data remains largely unexplored, primarily due to the challenges posed by complex relational structures and the absence of powerful, large-scale pretrained models for graphs. In this work, we take the first step toward enabling zero-shot graph OOD detection by leveraging a graph foundation model (GFM). Our experiments show that, when provided only with class label names for both ID and OOD categories, the GFM can effectively perform OOD detection - often surpassing existing "supervised" OOD detection methods that rely on extensive labeled node data. We further address the practical scenario in which OOD label names are not available in real-world settings by introducing GLIP-OOD, a framework that uses LLMs to generate semantically informative pseudo-OOD labels from unlabeled data. These generated OOD labels allow the GFM to better separate ID and OOD classes, facilitating more precise OOD detection - all without any labeled nodes (only ID label names). To our knowledge, this is the first approach to achieve node-level graph OOD detection in a fully zero-shot setting, and it attains performance comparable to state-of-the-art supervised methods on four benchmark text-attributed graph datasets.
2025-04-29T21:42:54Z
Haoyan Xu
Zhengtao Yao
Xuzhi Zhang
Ziyi Wang
Langzhou He
Yushun Dong
Philip S. Yu
Mengyuan Li
Yue Zhao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21194v2
ISS-Geo142: A Benchmark for Geolocating Astronaut Photography from the International Space Station
2025-11-20T23:01:30Z
This paper introduces ISS-Geo142, a curated benchmark for geolocating astronaut photography captured from the International Space Station (ISS). Although the ISS position at capture time is known precisely, the specific Earth locations depicted in these images are typically not directly georeferenced, making automated localization non-trivial. ISS-Geo142 consists of 142 images with associated metadata and manually determined geographic locations, spanning a range of spatial scales and scene types.
On top of this benchmark, we implement and evaluate three geolocation pipelines: a neural network based approach (NN-Geo) using VGG16 features and cross-correlation over map-derived Areas of Interest (AOIs), a Scale-Invariant Feature Transform based pipeline (SIFT-Match) using sliding-window feature matching on stitched high-resolution AOIs, and TerraByte, an AI system built around a GPT-4 model with vision capabilities that jointly reasons over image content and ISS coordinates. On ISS-Geo142, NN-Geo achieves a match for 75.52\% of the images under our evaluation protocol, SIFT-Match attains high precision on structurally rich scenes at substantial computational cost, and TerraByte establishes the strongest overall baseline, correctly geolocating approximately 90\% of the images while also producing human-readable geographic descriptions.
The methods and experiments were originally developed in 2023; this manuscript is a revised and extended version that situates the work relative to subsequent advances in cross-view geo-localization and remote-sensing vision--language models. Taken together, ISS-Geo142 and these three pipelines provide a concrete, historically grounded benchmark for future work on ISS image geolocation.
2025-04-29T22:00:02Z
Vedika Srivastava
Hemant Kumar Singh
Jaisal Singh
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21226v3
MemeBLIP2: A novel lightweight multimodal system to detect harmful memes
2025-07-26T23:28:24Z
Memes often merge visuals with brief text to share humor or opinions, yet some memes contain harmful messages such as hate speech. In this paper, we introduces MemeBLIP2, a light weight multimodal system that detects harmful memes by combining image and text features effectively. We build on previous studies by adding modules that align image and text representations into a shared space and fuse them for better classification. Using BLIP-2 as the core vision-language model, our system is evaluated on the PrideMM datasets. The results show that MemeBLIP2 can capture subtle cues in both modalities, even in cases with ironic or culturally specific content, thereby improving the detection of harmful material.
2025-04-29T23:41:06Z
11 pages, 3 figures. Accepted at the First Workshop on Multimodal Knowledge and Language Modeling (MKLM), IJCAI-25
Jiaqi Liu
Ran Tong
Aowei Shen
Shuzheng Li
Changlin Yang
Lisha Xu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21231v1
T2ID-CAS: Diffusion Model and Class Aware Sampling to Mitigate Class Imbalance in Neck Ultrasound Anatomical Landmark Detection
2025-04-29T23:46:21Z
Neck ultrasound (US) plays a vital role in airway management by providing non-invasive, real-time imaging that enables rapid and precise interventions. Deep learning-based anatomical landmark detection in neck US can further facilitate procedural efficiency. However, class imbalance within datasets, where key structures like tracheal rings and vocal folds are underrepresented, presents significant challenges for object detection models. To address this, we propose T2ID-CAS, a hybrid approach that combines a text-to-image latent diffusion model with class-aware sampling to generate high-quality synthetic samples for underrepresented classes. This approach, rarely explored in the ultrasound domain, improves the representation of minority classes. Experimental results using YOLOv9 for anatomical landmark detection in neck US demonstrated that T2ID-CAS achieved a mean Average Precision of 88.2, significantly surpassing the baseline of 66. This highlights its potential as a computationally efficient and scalable solution for mitigating class imbalance in AI-assisted ultrasound-guided interventions.
2025-04-29T23:46:21Z
submitted to IEEE EMBC 2025
Manikanta Varaganti
Amulya Vankayalapati
Nour Awad
Gregory R. Dion
Laura J. Brattain
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01448v2
OpenAVS: Training-Free Open-Vocabulary Audio Visual Segmentation with Foundational Models
2026-03-30T06:09:21Z
Audio-visual segmentation aims to separate sounding objects from videos by predicting pixel-level masks based on audio signals. Existing methods primarily concentrate on closed-set scenarios and direct audio-visual alignment and fusion, which limits their capability to generalize to new, unseen situations. In this paper, we propose OpenAVS, a novel training-free language-based approach that, for the first time, effectively aligns audio and visual modalities using text as a proxy for open-vocabulary Audio-Visual Segmentation (AVS). Equipped with multimedia foundation models, OpenAVS directly infers masks through 1) audio-to-text prompt generation, 2) LLM-guided prompt translation, and 3) text-to-visual sounding object segmentation. The objective of OpenAVS is to establish a simple yet flexible architecture that relies on the most appropriate foundation models by fully leveraging their capabilities to enable more effective knowledge transfer to the downstream AVS task. Moreover, we present a model-agnostic framework OpenAVS-ST that enables the integration of OpenAVS with any advanced supervised AVS model via pseudo-label based self-training. This approach enhances performance by effectively utilizing large-scale unlabeled data when available. Comprehensive experiments on three benchmark datasets demonstrate the superior performance of OpenAVS. It surpasses existing unsupervised, zero-shot, and few-shot AVS methods by a significant margin, achieving absolute performance gains of approximately 9.4% and 10.9% in mIoU and F-score, respectively, in challenging scenarios.
2025-04-30T01:52:10Z
Accepted by ICME 2026
Shengkai Chen
Yifang Yin
Jinming Cao
Shili Xiang
Zhenguang Liu
Roger Zimmermann
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00739v1
MoSAM: Motion-Guided Segment Anything Model with Spatial-Temporal Memory Selection
2025-04-30T02:19:31Z
The recent Segment Anything Model 2 (SAM2) has demonstrated exceptional capabilities in interactive object segmentation for both images and videos. However, as a foundational model on interactive segmentation, SAM2 performs segmentation directly based on mask memory from the past six frames, leading to two significant challenges. Firstly, during inference in videos, objects may disappear since SAM2 relies solely on memory without accounting for object motion information, which limits its long-range object tracking capabilities. Secondly, its memory is constructed from fixed past frames, making it susceptible to challenges associated with object disappearance or occlusion, due to potentially inaccurate segmentation results in memory. To address these problems, we present MoSAM, incorporating two key strategies to integrate object motion cues into the model and establish more reliable feature memory. Firstly, we propose Motion-Guided Prompting (MGP), which represents the object motion in both sparse and dense manners, then injects them into SAM2 through a set of motion-guided prompts. MGP enables the model to adjust its focus towards the direction of motion, thereby enhancing the object tracking capabilities. Furthermore, acknowledging that past segmentation results may be inaccurate, we devise a Spatial-Temporal Memory Selection (ST-MS) mechanism that dynamically identifies frames likely to contain accurate segmentation in both pixel- and frame-level. By eliminating potentially inaccurate mask predictions from memory, we can leverage more reliable memory features to exploit similar regions for improving segmentation results. Extensive experiments on various benchmarks of video object segmentation and video instance segmentation demonstrate that our MoSAM achieves state-of-the-art results compared to other competitors.
2025-04-30T02:19:31Z
Qiushi Yang
Yuan Yao
Miaomiao Cui
Liefeng Bo
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21266v1
CoCoDiff: Diversifying Skeleton Action Features via Coarse-Fine Text-Co-Guided Latent Diffusion
2025-04-30T02:50:24Z
In action recognition tasks, feature diversity is essential for enhancing model generalization and performance. Existing methods typically promote feature diversity by expanding the training data in the sample space, which often leads to inefficiencies and semantic inconsistencies. To overcome these problems, we propose a novel Coarse-fine text co-guidance Diffusion model (CoCoDiff). CoCoDiff generates diverse yet semantically consistent features in the latent space by leveraging diffusion and multi-granularity textual guidance. Specifically, our approach feeds spatio-temporal features extracted from skeleton sequences into a latent diffusion model to generate diverse action representations. Meanwhile, we introduce a coarse-fine text co-guided strategy that leverages textual information from large language models (LLMs) to ensure semantic consistency between the generated features and the original inputs. It is noted that CoCoDiff operates as a plug-and-play auxiliary module during training, incurring no additional inference cost. Extensive experiments demonstrate that CoCoDiff achieves SOTA performance on skeleton-based action recognition benchmarks, including NTU RGB+D, NTU RGB+D 120 and Kinetics-Skeleton.
2025-04-30T02:50:24Z
Zhifu Zhao
Hanyang Hua
Jianan Li
Shaoxin Wu
Fu Li
Yangtao Zhou
Yang Li
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21292v1
Can We Achieve Efficient Diffusion without Self-Attention? Distilling Self-Attention into Convolutions
2025-04-30T03:57:28Z
Contemporary diffusion models built upon U-Net or Diffusion Transformer (DiT) architectures have revolutionized image generation through transformer-based attention mechanisms. The prevailing paradigm has commonly employed self-attention with quadratic computational complexity to handle global spatial relationships in complex images, thereby synthesizing high-fidelity images with coherent visual semantics.Contrary to conventional wisdom, our systematic layer-wise analysis reveals an interesting discrepancy: self-attention in pre-trained diffusion models predominantly exhibits localized attention patterns, closely resembling convolutional inductive biases. This suggests that global interactions in self-attention may be less critical than commonly assumed.Driven by this, we propose \(Δ\)ConvFusion to replace conventional self-attention modules with Pyramid Convolution Blocks (\(Δ\)ConvBlocks).By distilling attention patterns into localized convolutional operations while keeping other components frozen, \(Δ\)ConvFusion achieves performance comparable to transformer-based counterparts while reducing computational cost by 6929$\times$ and surpassing LinFusion by 5.42$\times$ in efficiency--all without compromising generative fidelity.
2025-04-30T03:57:28Z
ZiYi Dong
Chengxing Zhou
Weijian Deng
Pengxu Wei
Xiangyang Ji
Liang Lin
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21307v5
The Linear Geometry of Interpretable Tokens: Jailbreaking Attacks and Defenses for Unlearned Diffusion Models
2026-10-05T21:21:21Z
Diffusion models excel at generating high-quality images but can memorize and reproduce harmful concepts when prompted. Although fine-tuning methods have been proposed to unlearn a target concept, they struggle to fully erase it while maintaining generation quality on other concepts, leaving models vulnerable to jailbreak attacks. Existing jailbreak methods demonstrate this vulnerability but offer limited insight into how unlearned models retain harmful concepts, limiting progress on effective defenses. In this work, we show that a coherent, interpretable, attack-accessible linear residual of the erased concept can be recovered in the token embedding space, and that both an attack and a defense follow from this structure. We introduce SubAttack, a novel jailbreaking attack that reads out this subspace by learning an orthogonal set of attack token embeddings, each being a linear combination of human-interpretable textual elements, revealing that unlearned models still retain the target concept through related textual components. Furthermore, our attack is also more powerful and transferable across text prompts, initial noises, and unlearned models than prior attacks. Conversely, projecting out the same subspace yields SubDefense, a lightweight plug-and-play defense mechanism that suppresses the residual concept in unlearned models. SubDefense provides stronger robustness than existing defenses while better preserving safe generation quality. Extensive experiments across multiple unlearning methods, concepts, and attack types demonstrate that our approach advances both understanding and mitigation of vulnerabilities in diffusion unlearning.
2025-04-30T04:33:43Z
TMLR 2026
Siyi Chen
Yimeng Zhang
Sijia Liu
Qing Qu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21314v1
Capturing Conditional Dependence via Auto-regressive Diffusion Models
2025-04-30T04:57:12Z
Diffusion models have demonstrated appealing performance in both image and video generation. However, many works discover that they struggle to capture important, high-level relationships that are present in the real world. For example, they fail to learn physical laws from data, and even fail to understand that the objects in the world exist in a stable fashion. This is due to the fact that important conditional dependence structures are not adequately captured in the vanilla diffusion models. In this work, we initiate an in-depth study on strengthening the diffusion model to capture the conditional dependence structures in the data. In particular, we examine the efficacy of the auto-regressive (AR) diffusion models for such purpose and develop the first theoretical results on the sampling error of AR diffusion models under (possibly) the mildest data assumption. Our theoretical findings indicate that, compared with typical diffusion models, the AR variant produces samples with a reduced gap in approximating the data conditional distribution. On the other hand, the overall inference time of the AR-diffusion models is only moderately larger than that for the vanilla diffusion models, making them still practical for large scale applications. We also provide empirical results showing that when there is clear conditional dependence structure in the data, the AR diffusion models captures such structure, whereas vanilla DDPM fails to do so. On the other hand, when there is no obvious conditional dependence across patches of the data, AR diffusion does not outperform DDPM.
2025-04-30T04:57:12Z
Xunpeng Huang
Yujin Han
Difan Zou
Yian Ma
Tong Zhang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21325v1
Text-Conditioned Diffusion Model for High-Fidelity Korean Font Generation
2025-04-30T05:24:49Z
Automatic font generation (AFG) is the process of creating a new font using only a few examples of the style images. Generating fonts for complex languages like Korean and Chinese, particularly in handwritten styles, presents significant challenges. Traditional AFGs, like Generative adversarial networks (GANs) and Variational Auto-Encoders (VAEs), are usually unstable during training and often face mode collapse problems. They also struggle to capture fine details within font images. To address these problems, we present a diffusion-based AFG method which generates high-quality, diverse Korean font images using only a single reference image, focusing on handwritten and printed styles. Our approach refines noisy images incrementally, ensuring stable training and visually appealing results. A key innovation is our text encoder, which processes phonetic representations to generate accurate and contextually correct characters, even for unseen characters. We used a pre-trained style encoder from DG FONT to effectively and accurately encode the style images. To further enhance the generation quality, we used perceptual loss that guides the model to focus on the global style of generated images. Experimental results on over 2000 Korean characters demonstrate that our model consistently generates accurate and detailed font images and outperforms benchmark methods, making it a reliable tool for generating authentic Korean fonts across different styles.
2025-04-30T05:24:49Z
6 pages, 4 figures, Accepted at ICOIN 2025
Abdul Sami
Avinash Kumar
Irfanullah Memon
Youngwon Jo
Muhammad Rizwan
Jaeyoung Choi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21334v1
Simple Visual Artifact Detection in Sora-Generated Videos
2025-04-30T05:41:43Z
The December 2024 release of OpenAI's Sora, a powerful video generation model driven by natural language prompts, highlights a growing convergence between large language models (LLMs) and video synthesis. As these multimodal systems evolve into video-enabled LLMs (VidLLMs), capable of interpreting, generating, and interacting with visual content, understanding their limitations and ensuring their safe deployment becomes essential. This study investigates visual artifacts frequently found and reported in Sora-generated videos, which can compromise quality, mislead viewers, or propagate disinformation. We propose a multi-label classification framework targeting four common artifact label types: label 1: boundary / edge defects, label 2: texture / noise issues, label 3: movement / joint anomalies, and label 4: object mismatches / disappearances. Using a dataset of 300 manually annotated frames extracted from 15 Sora-generated videos, we trained multiple 2D CNN architectures (ResNet-50, EfficientNet-B3 / B4, ViT-Base). The best-performing model trained by ResNet-50 achieved an average multi-label classification accuracy of 94.14%. This work supports the broader development of VidLLMs by contributing to (1) the creation of datasets for video quality evaluation, (2) interpretable artifact-based analysis beyond language metrics, and (3) the identification of visual risks relevant to factuality and safety.
2025-04-30T05:41:43Z
Misora Sugiyama
Hirokatsu Kataoka
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21336v3
UniBiomed: A Universal Foundation Model for Grounded Biomedical Image Interpretation
2025-12-11T09:08:31Z
The integration of AI-assisted biomedical image analysis into clinical practice demands AI-generated findings that are not only accurate but also interpretable to clinicians. However, existing biomedical AI models generally lack the ability to simultaneously generate diagnostic findings and localize corresponding biomedical objects. This limitation makes it challenging for clinicians to correlate AI-generated findings with visual evidence (e.g., tiny lesions) in images and interpret the results of AI models. To address this challenge, we introduce UniBiomed, the first universal foundation model for grounded biomedical image interpretation, which is capable of generating accurate diagnostic findings and simultaneously segmenting the corresponding biomedical targets. UniBiomed is based on a novel integration of Multi-modal Large Language Model and Segment Anything Model, which can effectively unify diverse biomedical tasks in universal training for advancing grounded interpretation. To develop UniBiomed, we curate a large-scale dataset comprising over 27 million triplets of images, region annotations, and text descriptions across ten biomedical imaging modalities. Extensive validation on 70 internal and 14 external datasets demonstrated the state-of-the-art performance of UniBiomed in diverse biomedical tasks, including image segmentation, disease recognition, region-aware diagnosis, vision question answering, and report generation. In summary, UniBiomed is a powerful and versatile biomedical foundation model, unlocking the untapped grounded interpretation capability for optimizing AI-assisted biomedical image analysis.
2025-04-30T05:51:48Z
A universal foundation model for grounded biomedical image interpretation
Linshan Wu
Yuxiang Nie
Sunan He
Jiaxin Zhuang
Luyang Luo
Tao Li
Zhuoyao Xie
Dexuan Chen
Yinghua Zhao
Neeraj Mahboobani
Varut Vardhanabhuti
Ronald Cheong Kin Chan
Yifan Peng
Pranav Rajpurkar
Hao Chen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21344v3
Vision-Language Model-Based Semantic-Guided Imaging Biomarker for Lung Nodule Malignancy Prediction
2025-11-01T19:04:13Z
Machine learning models have utilized semantic features, deep features, or both to assess lung nodule malignancy. However, their reliance on manual annotation during inference, limited interpretability, and sensitivity to imaging variations hinder their application in real-world clinical settings. Thus, this research aims to integrate semantic features derived from radiologists' assessments of nodules, guiding the model to learn clinically relevant, robust, and explainable imaging features for predicting lung cancer. We obtained 938 low-dose CT scans from the National Lung Screening Trial (NLST) with 1,261 nodules and semantic features. Additionally, the Lung Image Database Consortium dataset contains 1,018 CT scans, with 2,625 lesions annotated for nodule characteristics. Three external datasets were obtained from UCLA Health, the LUNGx Challenge, and the Duke Lung Cancer Screening. We fine-tuned a pretrained Contrastive Language-Image Pretraining (CLIP) model with a parameter-efficient fine-tuning approach to align imaging and semantic text features and predict the one-year lung cancer diagnosis. Our model outperformed state-of-the-art (SOTA) models in the NLST test set with an AUROC of 0.901 and AUPRC of 0.776. It also showed robust results in external datasets. Using CLIP, we also obtained predictions on semantic features through zero-shot inference, such as nodule margin (AUROC: 0.807), nodule consistency (0.812), and pleural attachment (0.840). Our approach surpasses the SOTA models in predicting lung cancer across datasets collected from diverse clinical settings, providing explainable outputs, aiding clinicians in comprehending the underlying meaning of model predictions. This approach also prevents the model from learning shortcuts and generalizes across clinical settings. The code is available at https://github.com/luotingzhuang/CLIP_nodule.
2025-04-30T06:11:34Z
Journal of Biomedical Informatics 172 (2025) 104947
Luoting Zhuang
Seyed Mohammad Hossein Tabatabaei
Ramin Salehi-Rad
Linh M. Tran
Denise R. Aberle
Ashley E. Prosper
William Hsu
10.1016/j.jbi.2025.104947
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21356v3
Nexus-Gen: Unified Image Understanding, Generation, and Editing via Prefilled Autoregression in Shared Embedding Space
2025-07-15T09:23:42Z
Unified multimodal generative models aim to integrate image understanding and generation abilities, offering significant advantages in harnessing multimodal corpora, particularly interleaved text-image data. However, existing unified models exhibit limitations in image synthesis quality, autoregressive error accumulation, and image editing capability. In this work, we propose Nexus-Gen, a novel architecture that unifies image understanding, generation, and editing tasks in a shared image embedding space. This shared space serves as a bridge for the autoregressive and diffusion models, which seamlessly integrates their complementary strengths in cross-modal modeling. To mitigate the severe error accumulation during autoregressive embedding prediction, we propose a novel prefilled autoregression strategy that aligns training-inference dynamics by prefilling input sequences with learnable embeddings. After multi-stage and multi-task training on our constructed large-scale dataset with 26.3 million samples, Nexus-Gen achieves state-of-the-art performance on the evaluation benchmarks spanning image understanding, generation and editing tasks. All models, datasets, and source codes are released in https://github.com/modelscope/Nexus-Gen to facilitate further advancements across the field.
2025-04-30T06:30:48Z
Hong Zhang
Zhongjie Duan
Xingjun Wang
Yuze Zhao
Weiyi Lu
Zhipeng Di
Yixuan Xu
Yingda Chen
Yu Zhang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21380v2
Sparse-to-Sparse Training of Diffusion Models
2026-02-04T10:49:40Z
Diffusion models (DMs) are a powerful type of generative models that have achieved state-of-the-art results in various image synthesis tasks and have shown potential in other domains, such as natural language processing and temporal data modeling. Despite their stable training dynamics and ability to produce diverse high-quality samples, DMs are notorious for requiring significant computational resources, both in the training and inference stages. Previous work has focused mostly on increasing the efficiency of model inference. This paper introduces, for the first time, the paradigm of sparse-to-sparse training to DMs, with the aim of improving both training and inference efficiency. We focus on unconditional generation and train sparse DMs from scratch (Latent Diffusion and ChiroDiff) on six datasets using three different methods (Static-DM, RigL-DM, and MagRan-DM) to study the effect of sparsity in model performance. Our experiments show that sparse DMs are able to match and often outperform their Dense counterparts, while substantially reducing the number of trainable parameters and FLOPs. We also identify safe and effective values to perform sparse-to-sparse training of DMs.
2025-04-30T07:28:11Z
Accepted to TMLR
Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) 2025
Inês Cardoso Oliveira
Decebal Constantin Mocanu
Luis A. Leiva
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21385v3
Physics-Guided Image Dehazing Diffusion
2025-11-17T06:33:51Z
Due to the domain gap between real-world and synthetic hazy images, current data-driven dehazing algorithms trained on synthetic datasets perform well on synthetic data but struggle to generalize to real-world scenarios. To address this challenge, we propose \textbf{I}mage \textbf{D}ehazing \textbf{D}iffusion \textbf{M}odels (IDDM), a novel diffusion process that incorporates the atmospheric scattering model into noise diffusion. IDDM aims to use the gradual haze formation process to help the denoising Unet robustly learn the distribution of clear images from the conditional input hazy images. We design a specialized training strategy centered around IDDM. Diffusion models are leveraged to bridge the domain gap from synthetic to real-world, while the atmospheric scattering model provides physical guidance for haze formation. During the forward process, IDDM simultaneously introduces haze and noise into clear images, and then robustly separates them during the sampling process. By training with physics-guided information, IDDM shows the ability of domain generalization, and effectively restores the real-world hazy images despite being trained on synthetic datasets. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our method through both quantitative and qualitative comparisons with state-of-the-art approaches.
2025-04-30T07:36:10Z
Shijun Zhou
Xing Xie
Baojie Fan
Jiandong Tian
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00745v1
Responsive DNN Adaptation for Video Analytics against Environment Shift via Hierarchical Mobile-Cloud Collaborations
2025-04-30T08:08:15Z
Mobile video analysis systems often encounter various deploying environments, where environment shifts present greater demands for responsiveness in adaptations of deployed "expert DNN models". Existing model adaptation frameworks primarily operate in a cloud-centric way, exhibiting degraded performance during adaptation and delayed reactions to environment shifts. Instead, this paper proposes MOCHA, a novel framework optimizing the responsiveness of continuous model adaptation through hierarchical collaborations between mobile and cloud resources. Specifically, MOCHA (1) reduces adaptation response delays by performing on-device model reuse and fast fine-tuning before requesting cloud model retrieval and end-to-end retraining; (2) accelerates history expert model retrieval by organizing them into a structured taxonomy utilizing domain semantics analyzed by a cloud foundation model as indices; (3) enables efficient local model reuse by maintaining onboard expert model caches for frequent scenes, which proactively prefetch model weights from the cloud model database. Extensive evaluations with real-world videos on three DNN tasks show MOCHA improves the model accuracy during adaptation by up to 6.8% while saving the response delay and retraining time by up to 35.5x and 3.0x respectively.
2025-04-30T08:08:15Z
Sensys 2025 final version
Maozhe Zhao
Shengzhong Liu
Fan Wu
Guihai Chen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21411v1
Galvatron: An Automatic Distributed System for Efficient Foundation Model Training
2025-04-30T08:11:45Z
Galvatron is a distributed system for efficiently training large-scale Foundation Models. It overcomes the complexities of selecting optimal parallelism strategies by automatically identifying the most efficient hybrid strategy, incorporating data, tensor, pipeline, sharded data, and sequence parallelism, along with recomputation. The system's architecture includes a profiler for hardware and model analysis, a search engine for strategy optimization using decision trees and dynamic programming, and a runtime for executing these strategies efficiently. Benchmarking on various clusters demonstrates Galvatron's superior throughput compared to existing frameworks. This open-source system offers user-friendly interfaces and comprehensive documentation, making complex distributed training accessible and efficient. The source code of Galvatron is available at https://github.com/PKU-DAIR/Hetu-Galvatron.
2025-04-30T08:11:45Z
Xinyi Liu
Yujie Wang
Shenhan Zhu
Fangcheng Fu
Qingshuo Liu
Guangming Lin
Bin Cui
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21423v1
Diff-Prompt: Diffusion-Driven Prompt Generator with Mask Supervision
2025-04-30T08:28:38Z
Prompt learning has demonstrated promising results in fine-tuning pre-trained multimodal models. However, the performance improvement is limited when applied to more complex and fine-grained tasks. The reason is that most existing methods directly optimize the parameters involved in the prompt generation process through loss backpropagation, which constrains the richness and specificity of the prompt representations. In this paper, we propose Diffusion-Driven Prompt Generator (Diff-Prompt), aiming to use the diffusion model to generate rich and fine-grained prompt information for complex downstream tasks. Specifically, our approach consists of three stages. In the first stage, we train a Mask-VAE to compress the masks into latent space. In the second stage, we leverage an improved Diffusion Transformer (DiT) to train a prompt generator in the latent space, using the masks for supervision. In the third stage, we align the denoising process of the prompt generator with the pre-trained model in the semantic space, and use the generated prompts to fine-tune the model. We conduct experiments on a complex pixel-level downstream task, referring expression comprehension, and compare our method with various parameter-efficient fine-tuning approaches. Diff-Prompt achieves a maximum improvement of 8.87 in R@1 and 14.05 in R@5 compared to the foundation model and also outperforms other state-of-the-art methods across multiple metrics. The experimental results validate the effectiveness of our approach and highlight the potential of using generative models for prompt generation. Code is available at https://github.com/Kelvin-ywc/diff-prompt.
2025-04-30T08:28:38Z
Accepted at ICLR 2025
Weicai Yan
Wang Lin
Zirun Guo
Ye Wang
Fangming Feng
Xiaoda Yang
Zehan Wang
Tao Jin
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21432v1
UAV-VLN: End-to-End Vision Language guided Navigation for UAVs
2025-04-30T08:40:47Z
A core challenge in AI-guided autonomy is enabling agents to navigate realistically and effectively in previously unseen environments based on natural language commands. We propose UAV-VLN, a novel end-to-end Vision-Language Navigation (VLN) framework for Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) that seamlessly integrates Large Language Models (LLMs) with visual perception to facilitate human-interactive navigation. Our system interprets free-form natural language instructions, grounds them into visual observations, and plans feasible aerial trajectories in diverse environments.
UAV-VLN leverages the common-sense reasoning capabilities of LLMs to parse high-level semantic goals, while a vision model detects and localizes semantically relevant objects in the environment. By fusing these modalities, the UAV can reason about spatial relationships, disambiguate references in human instructions, and plan context-aware behaviors with minimal task-specific supervision. To ensure robust and interpretable decision-making, the framework includes a cross-modal grounding mechanism that aligns linguistic intent with visual context.
We evaluate UAV-VLN across diverse indoor and outdoor navigation scenarios, demonstrating its ability to generalize to novel instructions and environments with minimal task-specific training. Our results show significant improvements in instruction-following accuracy and trajectory efficiency, highlighting the potential of LLM-driven vision-language interfaces for safe, intuitive, and generalizable UAV autonomy.
2025-04-30T08:40:47Z
Proc. European Conference on Mobile Robots (ECMR), 2025, pp. 1-6
Pranav Saxena
Nishant Raghuvanshi
Neena Goveas
10.1109/ECMR65884.2025.11163198
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00746v2
Entropy Heat-Mapping: Localizing GPT-Based OCR Errors with Sliding-Window Shannon Analysis
2025-05-06T03:09:13Z
Vision-language models such as OpenAI GPT-4o can transcribe mathematical documents directly from images, yet their token-level confidence signals are seldom used to pinpoint local recognition mistakes. We present an entropy-heat-mapping proof-of-concept that turns per-token Shannon entropy into a visual ''uncertainty landscape''. By scanning the entropy sequence with a fixed-length sliding window, we obtain hotspots that are likely to contain OCR errors such as missing symbols, mismatched braces, or garbled prose. Using a small, curated set of scanned research pages rendered at several resolutions, we compare the highlighted hotspots with the actual transcription errors produced by GPT-4o. Our analysis shows that the vast majority of true errors are indeed concentrated inside the high-entropy regions. This study demonstrates--in a minimally engineered setting--that sliding-window entropy can serve as a practical, lightweight aid for post-editing GPT-based OCR. All code and annotation guidelines are released to encourage replication and further research.
2025-04-30T09:05:49Z
22 pages
Alexei Kaltchenko
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21487v2
DGSolver: Diffusion Generalist Solver with Universal Posterior Sampling for Image Restoration
2025-05-08T07:57:04Z
Diffusion models have achieved remarkable progress in universal image restoration. While existing methods speed up inference by reducing sampling steps, substantial step intervals often introduce cumulative errors. Moreover, they struggle to balance the commonality of degradation representations and restoration quality. To address these challenges, we introduce \textbf{DGSolver}, a diffusion generalist solver with universal posterior sampling. We first derive the exact ordinary differential equations for generalist diffusion models and tailor high-order solvers with a queue-based accelerated sampling strategy to improve both accuracy and efficiency. We then integrate universal posterior sampling to better approximate manifold-constrained gradients, yielding a more accurate noise estimation and correcting errors in inverse inference. Extensive experiments show that DGSolver outperforms state-of-the-art methods in restoration accuracy, stability, and scalability, both qualitatively and quantitatively. Code and models will be available at https://github.com/MiliLab/DGSolver.
2025-04-30T10:12:48Z
Hebaixu Wang
Jing Zhang
Haonan Guo
Di Wang
Jiayi Ma
Bo Du
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21497v3
MagicPortrait: Temporally Consistent Face Reenactment with 3D Geometric Guidance
2025-10-29T08:32:29Z
In this study, we propose a method for video face reenactment that integrates a 3D face parametric model into a latent diffusion framework, aiming to improve shape consistency and motion control in existing video-based face generation approaches. Our approach employs the FLAME (Faces Learned with an Articulated Model and Expressions) model as the 3D face parametric representation, providing a unified framework for modeling face expressions and head pose. This not only enables precise extraction of motion features from driving videos, but also contributes to the faithful preservation of face shape and geometry. Specifically, we enhance the latent diffusion model with rich 3D expression and detailed pose information by incorporating depth maps, normal maps, and rendering maps derived from FLAME sequences. These maps serve as motion guidance and are encoded into the denoising UNet through a specifically designed Geometric Guidance Encoder (GGE). A multi-layer feature fusion module with integrated self-attention mechanisms is used to combine facial appearance and motion latent features within the spatial domain. By utilizing the 3D face parametric model as motion guidance, our method enables parametric alignment of face identity between the reference image and the motion captured from the driving video. Experimental results on benchmark datasets show that our method excels at generating high-quality face animations with precise expression and head pose variation modeling. In addition, it demonstrates strong generalization performance on out-of-domain images. Code is publicly available at https://github.com/weimengting/MagicPortrait.
2025-04-30T10:30:46Z
Mengting Wei
Yante Li
Tuomas Varanka
Yan Jiang
Guoying Zhao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21530v1
RoboGround: Robotic Manipulation with Grounded Vision-Language Priors
2025-04-30T11:26:40Z
Recent advancements in robotic manipulation have highlighted the potential of intermediate representations for improving policy generalization. In this work, we explore grounding masks as an effective intermediate representation, balancing two key advantages: (1) effective spatial guidance that specifies target objects and placement areas while also conveying information about object shape and size, and (2) broad generalization potential driven by large-scale vision-language models pretrained on diverse grounding datasets. We introduce RoboGround, a grounding-aware robotic manipulation system that leverages grounding masks as an intermediate representation to guide policy networks in object manipulation tasks. To further explore and enhance generalization, we propose an automated pipeline for generating large-scale, simulated data with a diverse set of objects and instructions. Extensive experiments show the value of our dataset and the effectiveness of grounding masks as intermediate guidance, significantly enhancing the generalization abilities of robot policies.
2025-04-30T11:26:40Z
Haifeng Huang
Xinyi Chen
Yilun Chen
Hao Li
Xiaoshen Han
Zehan Wang
Tai Wang
Jiangmiao Pang
Zhou Zhao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21559v1
Black-Box Visual Prompt Engineering for Mitigating Object Hallucination in Large Vision Language Models
2025-04-30T11:58:30Z
Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) often suffer from object hallucination, which undermines their reliability. Surprisingly, we find that simple object-based visual prompting -- overlaying visual cues (e.g., bounding box, circle) on images -- can significantly mitigate such hallucination; however, different visual prompts (VPs) vary in effectiveness. To address this, we propose Black-Box Visual Prompt Engineering (BBVPE), a framework to identify optimal VPs that enhance LVLM responses without needing access to model internals. Our approach employs a pool of candidate VPs and trains a router model to dynamically select the most effective VP for a given input image. This black-box approach is model-agnostic, making it applicable to both open-source and proprietary LVLMs. Evaluations on benchmarks such as POPE and CHAIR demonstrate that BBVPE effectively reduces object hallucination.
2025-04-30T11:58:30Z
NAACL 2025
Sangmin Woo
Kang Zhou
Yun Zhou
Shuai Wang
Sheng Guan
Haibo Ding
Lin Lee Cheong
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21561v5
Iterative Tool Usage Exploration for Multimodal Agents via Step-wise Preference Tuning
2026-06-11T07:05:17Z
Multimodal agents, which integrate a controller e.g., a vision language model) with external tools, have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in tackling complex multimodal tasks. Existing approaches for training these agents, both supervised fine-tuning and reinforcement learning, depend on extensive human-annotated task-answer pairs and tool trajectories. However, for complex multimodal tasks, such annotations are prohibitively expensive or impractical to obtain. In this paper, we propose an iterative tool usage exploration method for multimodal agents without any pre-collected data, namely SPORT, via step-wise preference optimization to refine the trajectories of tool usage. Our method enables multimodal agents to autonomously discover effective tool usage strategies through self-exploration and optimization, eliminating the bottleneck of human annotation. SPORT has four iterative components: task synthesis, step sampling, step verification, and preference tuning. We first synthesize multimodal tasks using language models. Then, we introduce a novel trajectory exploration scheme, where step sampling and step verification are executed alternately to solve synthesized tasks. In step sampling, the agent tries different tools and obtains corresponding results. In step verification, we employ a verifier to provide AI feedback to construct step-wise preference data. The data is subsequently used to update the controller for tool usage through preference tuning, producing a SPORT agent. By interacting with real environments, the SPORT agent gradually evolves into a more refined and capable system. Evaluation in the GTA and GAIA benchmarks shows that the SPORT agent achieves 6.41% and 3.64% improvements, underscoring the generalization and effectiveness introduced by our method. The project page is https://SPORT-Agents.github.io.
2025-04-30T12:01:27Z
24 pages
Pengxiang Li
Zhi Gao
Bofei Zhang
Yapeng Mi
Xiaojian Ma
Chenrui Shi
Tao Yuan
Yuwei Wu
Yunde Jia
Song-Chun Zhu
Qing Li
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21562v1
eNCApsulate: NCA for Precision Diagnosis on Capsule Endoscopes
2025-04-30T12:06:56Z
Wireless Capsule Endoscopy is a non-invasive imaging method for the entire gastrointestinal tract, and is a pain-free alternative to traditional endoscopy. It generates extensive video data that requires significant review time, and localizing the capsule after ingestion is a challenge. Techniques like bleeding detection and depth estimation can help with localization of pathologies, but deep learning models are typically too large to run directly on the capsule. Neural Cellular Automata (NCA) for bleeding segmentation and depth estimation are trained on capsule endoscopic images. For monocular depth estimation, we distill a large foundation model into the lean NCA architecture, by treating the outputs of the foundation model as pseudo ground truth. We then port the trained NCA to the ESP32 microcontroller, enabling efficient image processing on hardware as small as a camera capsule. NCA are more accurate (Dice) than other portable segmentation models, while requiring more than 100x fewer parameters stored in memory than other small-scale models. The visual results of NCA depth estimation look convincing, and in some cases beat the realism and detail of the pseudo ground truth. Runtime optimizations on the ESP32-S3 accelerate the average inference speed significantly, by more than factor 3. With several algorithmic adjustments and distillation, it is possible to eNCApsulate NCA models into microcontrollers that fit into wireless capsule endoscopes. This is the first work that enables reliable bleeding segmentation and depth estimation on a miniaturized device, paving the way for precise diagnosis combined with visual odometry as a means of precise localization of the capsule -- on the capsule.
2025-04-30T12:06:56Z
Henry John Krumb
Anirban Mukhopadhyay
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21646v3
Diffusion-based Adversarial Identity Manipulation for Facial Privacy Protection
2025-07-30T11:24:00Z
The success of face recognition (FR) systems has led to serious privacy concerns due to potential unauthorized surveillance and user tracking on social networks. Existing methods for enhancing privacy fail to generate natural face images that can protect facial privacy. In this paper, we propose diffusion-based adversarial identity manipulation (DiffAIM) to generate natural and highly transferable adversarial faces against malicious FR systems. To be specific, we manipulate facial identity within the low-dimensional latent space of a diffusion model. This involves iteratively injecting gradient-based adversarial identity guidance during the reverse diffusion process, progressively steering the generation toward the desired adversarial faces. The guidance is optimized for identity convergence towards a target while promoting semantic divergence from the source, facilitating effective impersonation while maintaining visual naturalness. We further incorporate structure-preserving regularization to preserve facial structure consistency during manipulation. Extensive experiments on both face verification and identification tasks demonstrate that compared with the state-of-the-art, DiffAIM achieves stronger black-box attack transferability while maintaining superior visual quality. We also demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed approach for commercial FR APIs, including Face++ and Aliyun.
2025-04-30T13:49:59Z
Accepted by ACM MM 2025
Liqin Wang
Qianyue Hu
Wei Lu
Xiangyang Luo
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21650v2
HoloTime: Taming Video Diffusion Models for Panoramic 4D Scene Generation
2025-05-13T09:04:40Z
The rapid advancement of diffusion models holds the promise of revolutionizing the application of VR and AR technologies, which typically require scene-level 4D assets for user experience. Nonetheless, existing diffusion models predominantly concentrate on modeling static 3D scenes or object-level dynamics, constraining their capacity to provide truly immersive experiences. To address this issue, we propose HoloTime, a framework that integrates video diffusion models to generate panoramic videos from a single prompt or reference image, along with a 360-degree 4D scene reconstruction method that seamlessly transforms the generated panoramic video into 4D assets, enabling a fully immersive 4D experience for users. Specifically, to tame video diffusion models for generating high-fidelity panoramic videos, we introduce the 360World dataset, the first comprehensive collection of panoramic videos suitable for downstream 4D scene reconstruction tasks. With this curated dataset, we propose Panoramic Animator, a two-stage image-to-video diffusion model that can convert panoramic images into high-quality panoramic videos. Following this, we present Panoramic Space-Time Reconstruction, which leverages a space-time depth estimation method to transform the generated panoramic videos into 4D point clouds, enabling the optimization of a holistic 4D Gaussian Splatting representation to reconstruct spatially and temporally consistent 4D scenes. To validate the efficacy of our method, we conducted a comparative analysis with existing approaches, revealing its superiority in both panoramic video generation and 4D scene reconstruction. This demonstrates our method's capability to create more engaging and realistic immersive environments, thereby enhancing user experiences in VR and AR applications.
2025-04-30T13:55:28Z
Project Homepage: https://zhouhyocean.github.io/holotime/ Code: https://github.com/PKU-YuanGroup/HoloTime
Haiyang Zhou
Wangbo Yu
Jiawen Guan
Xinhua Cheng
Yonghong Tian
Li Yuan
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21682v2
Visual Text Processing: A Comprehensive Review and Unified Evaluation
2025-06-05T18:59:02Z
Visual text is a crucial component in both document and scene images, conveying rich semantic information and attracting significant attention in the computer vision community. Beyond traditional tasks such as text detection and recognition, visual text processing has witnessed rapid advancements driven by the emergence of foundation models, including text image reconstruction and text image manipulation. Despite significant progress, challenges remain due to the unique properties that differentiate text from general objects. Effectively capturing and leveraging these distinct textual characteristics is essential for developing robust visual text processing models. In this survey, we present a comprehensive, multi-perspective analysis of recent advancements in visual text processing, focusing on two key questions: (1) What textual features are most suitable for different visual text processing tasks? (2) How can these distinctive text features be effectively incorporated into processing frameworks? Furthermore, we introduce VTPBench, a new benchmark that encompasses a broad range of visual text processing datasets. Leveraging the advanced visual quality assessment capabilities of multimodal large language models (MLLMs), we propose VTPScore, a novel evaluation metric designed to ensure fair and reliable evaluation. Our empirical study with more than 20 specific models reveals substantial room for improvement in the current techniques. Our aim is to establish this work as a fundamental resource that fosters future exploration and innovation in the dynamic field of visual text processing. The relevant repository is available at https://github.com/shuyansy/Visual-Text-Processing-survey.
2025-04-30T14:19:29Z
Yan Shu
Weichao Zeng
Fangmin Zhao
Zeyu Chen
Zhenhang Li
Xiaomeng Yang
Yu Zhou
Paolo Rota
Xiang Bai
Lianwen Jin
Xu-Cheng Yin
Nicu Sebe
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21810v1
A simple and effective approach for body part recognition on CT scans based on projection estimation
2025-04-30T17:13:44Z
It is well known that machine learning models require a high amount of annotated data to obtain optimal performance. Labelling Computed Tomography (CT) data can be a particularly challenging task due to its volumetric nature and often missing and$/$or incomplete associated meta-data. Even inspecting one CT scan requires additional computer software, or in the case of programming languages $-$ additional programming libraries. This study proposes a simple, yet effective approach based on 2D X-ray-like estimation of 3D CT scans for body region identification. Although body region is commonly associated with the CT scan, it often describes only the focused major body region neglecting other anatomical regions present in the observed CT. In the proposed approach, estimated 2D images were utilized to identify 14 distinct body regions, providing valuable information for constructing a high-quality medical dataset. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, it was compared against 2.5D, 3D and foundation model (MI2) based approaches. Our approach outperformed the others, where it came on top with statistical significance and F1-Score for the best-performing model EffNet-B0 of 0.980 $\pm$ 0.016 in comparison to the 0.840 $\pm$ 0.114 (2.5D DenseNet-161), 0.854 $\pm$ 0.096 (3D VoxCNN), and 0.852 $\pm$ 0.104 (MI2 foundation model). The utilized dataset comprised three different clinical centers and counted 15,622 CT scans (44,135 labels).
2025-04-30T17:13:44Z
19 pages, 6 figures
Franko Hrzic
Mohammadreza Movahhedi
Ophelie Lavoie-Gagne
Ata Kiapour
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21814v1
Why Compress What You Can Generate? When GPT-4o Generation Ushers in Image Compression Fields
2025-04-30T17:20:14Z
The rapid development of AIGC foundation models has revolutionized the paradigm of image compression, which paves the way for the abandonment of most pixel-level transform and coding, compelling us to ask: why compress what you can generate if the AIGC foundation model is powerful enough to faithfully generate intricate structure and fine-grained details from nothing more than some compact descriptors, i.e., texts, or cues. Fortunately, recent GPT-4o image generation of OpenAI has achieved impressive cross-modality generation, editing, and design capabilities, which motivates us to answer the above question by exploring its potential in image compression fields. In this work, we investigate two typical compression paradigms: textual coding and multimodal coding (i.e., text + extremely low-resolution image), where all/most pixel-level information is generated instead of compressing via the advanced GPT-4o image generation function. The essential challenge lies in how to maintain semantic and structure consistency during the decoding process. To overcome this, we propose a structure raster-scan prompt engineering mechanism to transform the image into textual space, which is compressed as the condition of GPT-4o image generation. Extensive experiments have shown that the combination of our designed structural raster-scan prompts and GPT-4o's image generation function achieved the impressive performance compared with recent multimodal/generative image compression at ultra-low bitrate, further indicating the potential of AIGC generation in image compression fields.
2025-04-30T17:20:14Z
Yixin Gao
Xiaohan Pan
Xin Li
Zhibo Chen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21831v2
Early Exit and Multi Stage Knowledge Distillation in VLMs for Video Summarization
2025-09-11T05:48:04Z
We introduce DEEVISum (Distilled Early Exit Vision language model for Summarization), a lightweight, efficient, and scalable vision language model designed for segment wise video summarization. Leveraging multi modal prompts that combine textual and audio derived signals, DEEVISum incorporates Multi Stage Knowledge Distillation (MSKD) and Early Exit (EE) to strike a balance between performance and efficiency. MSKD offers a 1.33% absolute F1 improvement over baseline distillation (0.5%), while EE reduces inference time by approximately 21% with a 1.3 point drop in F1. Evaluated on the TVSum dataset, our best model PaLI Gemma2 3B + MSKD achieves an F1 score of 61.1, competing the performance of significantly larger models, all while maintaining a lower computational footprint. We publicly release our code and processed dataset to support further research.
2025-04-30T17:37:55Z
Anas Anwarul Haq Khan
Utkarsh Verma
Ganesh Ramakrishnan
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21850v3
Visual Compositional Tuning
2026-05-14T18:32:02Z
Visual instruction tuning (VIT) datasets have grown rapidly in scale, yet the informativeness of individual training samples has largely been overlooked. Recent dataset selection methods have shown that a small fraction of such datasets enriched with informative samples can lead to efficient finetuning of Multimodal Large Language Models. In this work, we explore the impact of sample complexity on informative data curation and introduce COMPACT (COMPositional Atomic-to-complex Visual Compositional Tuning), a compositional VIT data recipe that scales training sample complexity by combining multiple atomic visual capabilities in a single training example. Concretely, we synthesize rich and informative text questions for each image, allowing us to significantly reduce the number of training examples required for effective VIT. COMPACT demonstrates superior data efficiency compared to existing data reduction methods. When applied to the LLaVA-665K VIT dataset, COMPACT reduces the data budget by 90% while still achieving 100.2% of the full VIT performance (compared to only 97.5% by the state-of-the-art method) across eight multimodal benchmarks. Furthermore, training on the COMPACT data outperforms training on the full-scale VIT data on particularly complex benchmarks such as MM-Vet (+8.6%) and MMStar (+2.9%). COMPACT offers a scalable and efficient synthetic data generation recipe to improve on vision-language tasks.
2025-04-30T17:57:22Z
See the project website at this [URL](https://princetonvisualai.github.io/compact/)
Xindi Wu
Hee Seung Hwang
Polina Kirichenko
Esin Tureci
Olga Russakovsky
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21855v2
ReVision: Refining Video Diffusion with Explicit 3D Motion Modeling
2026-01-08T20:14:53Z
In recent years, video generation has seen significant advancements. However, challenges still persist in generating complex motions and interactions. To address these challenges, we introduce ReVision, a plug-and-play framework that explicitly integrates parameterized 3D model knowledge into a pretrained conditional video generation model, significantly enhancing its ability to generate high-quality videos with complex motion and interactions. Specifically, ReVision consists of three stages. First, a video diffusion model is used to generate a coarse video. Next, we extract a set of 2D and 3D features from the coarse video to construct a 3D object-centric representation, which is then refined by our proposed parameterized motion prior model to produce an accurate 3D motion sequence. Finally, this refined motion sequence is fed back into the same video diffusion model as additional conditioning, enabling the generation of motion-consistent videos, even in scenarios involving complex actions and interactions. We validate the effectiveness of our approach on Stable Video Diffusion, where ReVision significantly improves motion fidelity and coherence. Remarkably, with only 1.5B parameters, it even outperforms a state-of-the-art video generation model with over 13B parameters on complex video generation by a substantial margin. Our results suggest that, by incorporating 3D motion knowledge, even a relatively small video diffusion model can generate complex motions and interactions with greater realism and controllability, offering a promising solution for physically plausible video generation.
2025-04-30T17:59:56Z
TMLR camera-ready version. Project Page: https://revision-video.github.io/
Qihao Liu
Ju He
Qihang Yu
Liang-Chieh Chen
Alan Yuille
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00134v1
Investigating Zero-Shot Diagnostic Pathology in Vision-Language Models with Efficient Prompt Design
2025-04-30T19:01:06Z
Vision-language models (VLMs) have gained significant attention in computational pathology due to their multimodal learning capabilities that enhance big-data analytics of giga-pixel whole slide image (WSI). However, their sensitivity to large-scale clinical data, task formulations, and prompt design remains an open question, particularly in terms of diagnostic accuracy. In this paper, we present a systematic investigation and analysis of three state of the art VLMs for histopathology, namely Quilt-Net, Quilt-LLAVA, and CONCH, on an in-house digestive pathology dataset comprising 3,507 WSIs, each in giga-pixel form, across distinct tissue types. Through a structured ablative study on cancer invasiveness and dysplasia status, we develop a comprehensive prompt engineering framework that systematically varies domain specificity, anatomical precision, instructional framing, and output constraints. Our findings demonstrate that prompt engineering significantly impacts model performance, with the CONCH model achieving the highest accuracy when provided with precise anatomical references. Additionally, we identify the critical importance of anatomical context in histopathological image analysis, as performance consistently degraded when reducing anatomical precision. We also show that model complexity alone does not guarantee superior performance, as effective domain alignment and domain-specific training are critical. These results establish foundational guidelines for prompt engineering in computational pathology and highlight the potential of VLMs to enhance diagnostic accuracy when properly instructed with domain-appropriate prompts.
2025-04-30T19:01:06Z
Vasudev Sharma
Ahmed Alagha
Abdelhakim Khellaf
Vincent Quoc-Huy Trinh
Mahdi S. Hosseini
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00135v1
Eye2Eye: A Simple Approach for Monocular-to-Stereo Video Synthesis
2025-04-30T19:06:09Z
The rising popularity of immersive visual experiences has increased interest in stereoscopic 3D video generation. Despite significant advances in video synthesis, creating 3D videos remains challenging due to the relative scarcity of 3D video data. We propose a simple approach for transforming a text-to-video generator into a video-to-stereo generator. Given an input video, our framework automatically produces the video frames from a shifted viewpoint, enabling a compelling 3D effect. Prior and concurrent approaches for this task typically operate in multiple phases, first estimating video disparity or depth, then warping the video accordingly to produce a second view, and finally inpainting the disoccluded regions. This approach inherently fails when the scene involves specular surfaces or transparent objects. In such cases, single-layer disparity estimation is insufficient, resulting in artifacts and incorrect pixel shifts during warping. Our work bypasses these restrictions by directly synthesizing the new viewpoint, avoiding any intermediate steps. This is achieved by leveraging a pre-trained video model's priors on geometry, object materials, optics, and semantics, without relying on external geometry models or manually disentangling geometry from the synthesis process. We demonstrate the advantages of our approach in complex, real-world scenarios featuring diverse object materials and compositions. See videos on https://video-eye2eye.github.io
2025-04-30T19:06:09Z
Michal Geyer
Omer Tov
Linyi Jin
Richard Tucker
Inbar Mosseri
Tali Dekel
Noah Snavely
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00150v1
Detecting and Mitigating Hateful Content in Multimodal Memes with Vision-Language Models
2025-04-30T19:48:12Z
The rapid evolution of social media has provided enhanced communication channels for individuals to create online content, enabling them to express their thoughts and opinions. Multimodal memes, often utilized for playful or humorous expressions with visual and textual elements, are sometimes misused to disseminate hate speech against individuals or groups. While the detection of hateful memes is well-researched, developing effective methods to transform hateful content in memes remains a significant challenge. Leveraging the powerful generation and reasoning capabilities of Vision-Language Models (VLMs), we address the tasks of detecting and mitigating hateful content. This paper presents two key contributions: first, a definition-guided prompting technique for detecting hateful memes, and second, a unified framework for mitigating hateful content in memes, named UnHateMeme, which works by replacing hateful textual and/or visual components. With our definition-guided prompts, VLMs achieve impressive performance on hateful memes detection task. Furthermore, our UnHateMeme framework, integrated with VLMs, demonstrates a strong capability to convert hateful memes into non-hateful forms that meet human-level criteria for hate speech and maintain multimodal coherence between image and text. Through empirical experiments, we show the effectiveness of state-of-the-art pretrained VLMs such as LLaVA, Gemini and GPT-4o on the proposed tasks, providing a comprehensive analysis of their respective strengths and limitations for these tasks. This paper aims to shed light on important applications of VLMs for ensuring safe and respectful online environments.
2025-04-30T19:48:12Z
Minh-Hao Van
Xintao Wu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00156v1
V3LMA: Visual 3D-enhanced Language Model for Autonomous Driving
2025-04-30T20:00:37Z
Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) have shown strong capabilities in understanding and analyzing visual scenes across various domains. However, in the context of autonomous driving, their limited comprehension of 3D environments restricts their effectiveness in achieving a complete and safe understanding of dynamic surroundings. To address this, we introduce V3LMA, a novel approach that enhances 3D scene understanding by integrating Large Language Models (LLMs) with LVLMs. V3LMA leverages textual descriptions generated from object detections and video inputs, significantly boosting performance without requiring fine-tuning. Through a dedicated preprocessing pipeline that extracts 3D object data, our method improves situational awareness and decision-making in complex traffic scenarios, achieving a score of 0.56 on the LingoQA benchmark. We further explore different fusion strategies and token combinations with the goal of advancing the interpretation of traffic scenes, ultimately enabling safer autonomous driving systems.
2025-04-30T20:00:37Z
Jannik Lübberstedt
Esteban Rivera
Nico Uhlemann
Markus Lienkamp
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00209v1
Direct Motion Models for Assessing Generated Videos
2025-04-30T22:34:52Z
A current limitation of video generative video models is that they generate plausible looking frames, but poor motion -- an issue that is not well captured by FVD and other popular methods for evaluating generated videos. Here we go beyond FVD by developing a metric which better measures plausible object interactions and motion. Our novel approach is based on auto-encoding point tracks and yields motion features that can be used to not only compare distributions of videos (as few as one generated and one ground truth, or as many as two datasets), but also for evaluating motion of single videos. We show that using point tracks instead of pixel reconstruction or action recognition features results in a metric which is markedly more sensitive to temporal distortions in synthetic data, and can predict human evaluations of temporal consistency and realism in generated videos obtained from open-source models better than a wide range of alternatives. We also show that by using a point track representation, we can spatiotemporally localize generative video inconsistencies, providing extra interpretability of generated video errors relative to prior work. An overview of the results and link to the code can be found on the project page: http://trajan-paper.github.io.
2025-04-30T22:34:52Z
Project page: http://trajan-paper.github.io
Kelsey Allen
Carl Doersch
Guangyao Zhou
Mohammed Suhail
Danny Driess
Ignacio Rocco
Yulia Rubanova
Thomas Kipf
Mehdi S. M. Sajjadi
Kevin Murphy
Joao Carreira
Sjoerd van Steenkiste
