https://arxiv.org/api/bBaCa4YMj1sebz8x1kqXozcCi2I
arXiv Query: search_query=submittedDate:"202504280000 TO 202504302359" AND ( (cat:cs.CL OR cat:cs.LG) AND (all:"language model" OR all:Transformer OR all:"mixture of experts" OR all:"representation learning" OR all:"reinforcement learning") )&id_list=&start=0&max_results=100
2026-10-07T07:18:04Z
100
225
0
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19395v2
ICL CIPHERS: Quantifying "Learning" in In-Context Learning via Substitution Ciphers
2025-08-27T01:37:05Z
Recent works have suggested that In-Context Learning (ICL) operates in dual modes, i.e. task retrieval (remember learned patterns from pre-training) and task learning (inference-time ''learning'' from demonstrations). However, disentangling these the two modes remains a challenging goal. We introduce ICL CIPHERS, a class of task reformulations based on substitution ciphers borrowed from classic cryptography. In this approach, a subset of tokens in the in-context inputs are substituted with other (irrelevant) tokens, rendering English sentences less comprehensible to human eye. However, by design, there is a latent, fixed pattern to this substitution, making it reversible. This bijective (reversible) cipher ensures that the task remains a well-defined task in some abstract sense, despite the transformations. It is a curious question if LLMs can solve tasks reformulated by ICL CIPHERS with a BIJECTIVE mapping, which requires ''deciphering'' the latent cipher. We show that LLMs are better at solving tasks reformulated by ICL CIPHERS with BIJECTIVE mappings than the NON-BIJECTIVE (irreversible) baseline, providing a novel approach to quantify ''learning'' in ICL. While this gap is small, it is consistent across the board on four datasets and six models. Finally, we examine LLMs' internal representations and identify evidence in their ability to decode the ciphered inputs.
2025-04-28T00:05:29Z
Zhouxiang Fang
Aayush Mishra
Muhan Gao
Anqi Liu
Daniel Khashabi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20113v1
Transforming Evidence Synthesis: A Systematic Review of the Evolution of Automated Meta-Analysis in the Age of AI
2025-04-28T00:40:17Z
Exponential growth in scientific literature has heightened the demand for efficient evidence-based synthesis, driving the rise of the field of Automated Meta-analysis (AMA) powered by natural language processing and machine learning. This PRISMA systematic review introduces a structured framework for assessing the current state of AMA, based on screening 978 papers from 2006 to 2024, and analyzing 54 studies across diverse domains. Findings reveal a predominant focus on automating data processing (57%), such as extraction and statistical modeling, while only 17% address advanced synthesis stages. Just one study (2%) explored preliminary full-process automation, highlighting a critical gap that limits AMA's capacity for comprehensive synthesis. Despite recent breakthroughs in large language models (LLMs) and advanced AI, their integration into statistical modeling and higher-order synthesis, such as heterogeneity assessment and bias evaluation, remains underdeveloped. This has constrained AMA's potential for fully autonomous meta-analysis. From our dataset spanning medical (67%) and non-medical (33%) applications, we found that AMA has exhibited distinct implementation patterns and varying degrees of effectiveness in actually improving efficiency, scalability, and reproducibility. While automation has enhanced specific meta-analytic tasks, achieving seamless, end-to-end automation remains an open challenge. As AI systems advance in reasoning and contextual understanding, addressing these gaps is now imperative. Future efforts must focus on bridging automation across all meta-analysis stages, refining interpretability, and ensuring methodological robustness to fully realize AMA's potential for scalable, domain-agnostic synthesis.
2025-04-28T00:40:17Z
Lingbo Li
Anuradha Mathrani
Teo Susnjak
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00030v1
Can Language Models Represent the Past without Anachronism?
2025-04-28T01:14:09Z
Before researchers can use language models to simulate the past, they need to understand the risk of anachronism. We find that prompting a contemporary model with examples of period prose does not produce output consistent with period style. Fine-tuning produces results that are stylistically convincing enough to fool an automated judge, but human evaluators can still distinguish fine-tuned model outputs from authentic historical text. We tentatively conclude that pretraining on period prose may be required in order to reliably simulate historical perspectives for social research.
2025-04-28T01:14:09Z
Ted Underwood
Laura K. Nelson
Matthew Wilkens
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19406v2
Context Selection and Rewriting for Video-based Educational Question Generation
2025-04-29T02:52:23Z
Educational question generation (EQG) is a crucial component of intelligent educational systems, significantly aiding self-assessment, active learning, and personalized education. While EQG systems have emerged, existing datasets typically rely on predefined, carefully edited texts, failing to represent real-world classroom content, including lecture speech with a set of complementary slides. To bridge this gap, we collect a dataset of educational questions based on lectures from real-world classrooms. On this realistic dataset, we find that current methods for EQG struggle with accurately generating questions from educational videos, particularly in aligning with specific timestamps and target answers. Common challenges include selecting informative contexts from extensive transcripts and ensuring generated questions meaningfully incorporate the target answer. To address the challenges, we introduce a novel framework utilizing large language models for dynamically selecting and rewriting contexts based on target timestamps and answers. First, our framework selects contexts from both lecture transcripts and video keyframes based on answer relevance and temporal proximity. Then, we integrate the contexts selected from both modalities and rewrite them into answer-containing knowledge statements, to enhance the logical connection between the contexts and the desired answer. This approach significantly improves the quality and relevance of the generated questions. Our dataset and code are released in https://github.com/mengxiayu/COSER.
2025-04-28T01:18:08Z
Mengxia Yu
Bang Nguyen
Olivia Zino
Meng Jiang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19413v1
Mem0: Building Production-Ready AI Agents with Scalable Long-Term Memory
2025-04-28T01:46:35Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable prowess in generating contextually coherent responses, yet their fixed context windows pose fundamental challenges for maintaining consistency over prolonged multi-session dialogues. We introduce Mem0, a scalable memory-centric architecture that addresses this issue by dynamically extracting, consolidating, and retrieving salient information from ongoing conversations. Building on this foundation, we further propose an enhanced variant that leverages graph-based memory representations to capture complex relational structures among conversational elements. Through comprehensive evaluations on LOCOMO benchmark, we systematically compare our approaches against six baseline categories: (i) established memory-augmented systems, (ii) retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) with varying chunk sizes and k-values, (iii) a full-context approach that processes the entire conversation history, (iv) an open-source memory solution, (v) a proprietary model system, and (vi) a dedicated memory management platform. Empirical results show that our methods consistently outperform all existing memory systems across four question categories: single-hop, temporal, multi-hop, and open-domain. Notably, Mem0 achieves 26% relative improvements in the LLM-as-a-Judge metric over OpenAI, while Mem0 with graph memory achieves around 2% higher overall score than the base configuration. Beyond accuracy gains, we also markedly reduce computational overhead compared to full-context method. In particular, Mem0 attains a 91% lower p95 latency and saves more than 90% token cost, offering a compelling balance between advanced reasoning capabilities and practical deployment constraints. Our findings highlight critical role of structured, persistent memory mechanisms for long-term conversational coherence, paving the way for more reliable and efficient LLM-driven AI agents.
2025-04-28T01:46:35Z
Prateek Chhikara
Dev Khant
Saket Aryan
Taranjeet Singh
Deshraj Yadav
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19436v1
Context-Guided Dynamic Retrieval for Improving Generation Quality in RAG Models
2025-04-28T02:50:45Z
This paper focuses on the dynamic optimization of the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) architecture. It proposes a state-aware dynamic knowledge retrieval mechanism to enhance semantic understanding and knowledge scheduling efficiency in large language models for open-domain question answering and complex generation tasks. The method introduces a multi-level perceptive retrieval vector construction strategy and a differentiable document matching path. These components enable end-to-end joint training and collaborative optimization of the retrieval and generation modules. This effectively addresses the limitations of static RAG structures in context adaptation and knowledge access. Experiments are conducted on the Natural Questions dataset. The proposed structure is thoroughly evaluated across different large models, including GPT-4, GPT-4o, and DeepSeek. Comparative and ablation experiments from multiple perspectives confirm the significant improvements in BLEU and ROUGE-L scores. The approach also demonstrates stronger robustness and generation consistency in tasks involving semantic ambiguity and multi-document fusion. These results highlight its broad application potential and practical value in building high-quality language generation systems.
2025-04-28T02:50:45Z
Jacky He
Guiran Liu
Binrong Zhu
Hanlu Zhang
Hongye Zheng
Xiaokai Wang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19444v1
Large Language Models are Qualified Benchmark Builders: Rebuilding Pre-Training Datasets for Advancing Code Intelligence Tasks
2025-04-28T03:16:34Z
Pre-trained code models rely heavily on high-quality pre-training data, particularly human-written reference comments that bridge code and natural language. However, these comments often become outdated as software evolves, degrading model performance. Large language models (LLMs) excel at generating high-quality code comments. We investigate whether replacing human-written comments with LLM-generated ones improves pre-training datasets. Since standard metrics cannot assess reference comment quality, we propose two novel reference-free evaluation tasks: code-comment inconsistency detection and semantic code search. Results show that LLM-generated comments are more semantically consistent with code than human-written ones, as confirmed by manual evaluation. Leveraging this finding, we rebuild the CodeSearchNet dataset with LLM-generated comments and re-pre-train CodeT5. Evaluations demonstrate that models trained on LLM-enhanced data outperform those using original human comments in code summarization, generation, and translation tasks. This work validates rebuilding pre-training datasets with LLMs to advance code intelligence, challenging the traditional reliance on human reference comments.
2025-04-28T03:16:34Z
Awarded the ACM SIGSOFT Distinguished Paper Award in ICPC 2025
Kang Yang
Xinjun Mao
Shangwen Wang
Yanlin Wang
Tanghaoran Zhang
Bo Lin
Yihao Qin
Zhang Zhang
Yao Lu
Kamal Al-Sabahi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19445v1
Systematic Bias in Large Language Models: Discrepant Response Patterns in Binary vs. Continuous Judgment Tasks
2025-04-28T03:20:55Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used in tasks such as psychological text analysis and decision-making in automated workflows. However, their reliability remains a concern due to potential biases inherited from their training process. In this study, we examine how different response format: binary versus continuous, may systematically influence LLMs' judgments. In a value statement judgments task and a text sentiment analysis task, we prompted LLMs to simulate human responses and tested both formats across several models, including both open-source and commercial models. Our findings revealed a consistent negative bias: LLMs were more likely to deliver "negative" judgments in binary formats compared to continuous ones. Control experiments further revealed that this pattern holds across both tasks. Our results highlight the importance of considering response format when applying LLMs to decision tasks, as small changes in task design can introduce systematic biases.
2025-04-28T03:20:55Z
Yi-Long Lu
Chunhui Zhang
Wei Wang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19449v1
R-Sparse: Rank-Aware Activation Sparsity for Efficient LLM Inference
2025-04-28T03:30:32Z
Large Language Models (LLMs), while demonstrating remarkable capabilities across various applications, present significant challenges during inference due to their substantial model size, especially when deployed on edge devices. Activation sparsity offers a promising solution to reduce computation and memory movement, enabling more efficient inference, particularly for small-batch on-device applications. However, current approaches face limitations with non-ReLU activation function, which are foundational to most advanced LLMs, or require heavy continual training. Additionally, the difficulty in predicting active channels and limited achievable sparsity ratios constrain the effectiveness of activation sparsity-based methods. In this paper, we introduce R-Sparse, a training-free activation sparsity approach capable of achieving high sparsity levels in advanced LLMs. We conducted two preliminary investigations into how different components contribute to the output within a single linear layer and found two key observations: (i) the non-sparse components of the input function can be regarded as a few bias terms, and (ii) The full computation can be effectively approximated by an appropriate combination of input channels and weight singular values. Building on this, we replace the linear layers in LLMs with a rank-aware sparse inference method that leverages the sparsity of input channels and singular value components, eliminating the need for active channel prediction like the output sparsity based approaches. Experiments on Llama-2/3 and Mistral models across ten diverse tasks demonstrate that R-Sparse achieves comparable performance at 50% model-level sparsity, resulting in a significant 43% end-to-end efficient improvements with customized kernels.
2025-04-28T03:30:32Z
ICLR 2025
Zhenyu Zhang
Zechun Liu
Yuandong Tian
Harshit Khaitan
Zhangyang Wang
Steven Li
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19452v5
Geometry-Informed Neural Operator Transformer
2025-12-12T16:45:00Z
Machine-learning-based surrogate models offer significant computational efficiency and faster simulations compared to traditional numerical methods, especially for problems requiring repeated evaluations of partial differential equations. This work introduces the Geometry-Informed Neural Operator Transformer (GINOT), which integrates the transformer architecture with the neural operator framework to enable forward predictions on arbitrary geometries. GINOT employs a sampling and grouping strategy together with an attention mechanism to encode surface point clouds that are unordered, exhibit non-uniform point densities, and contain varying numbers of points for different geometries. The geometry information is seamlessly integrated with query points in the solution decoder through the attention mechanism. The performance of GINOT is validated on multiple challenging datasets, showcasing its high accuracy and strong generalization capabilities for complex and arbitrary 2D and 3D geometries.
2025-04-28T03:39:27Z
Qibang Liu
Weiheng Zhong
Hadi Meidani
Diab Abueidda
Seid Koric
Philippe Geubelle
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19457v1
Towards Long Context Hallucination Detection
2025-04-28T03:47:05Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance across various tasks. However, they are prone to contextual hallucination, generating information that is either unsubstantiated or contradictory to the given context. Although many studies have investigated contextual hallucinations in LLMs, addressing them in long-context inputs remains an open problem. In this work, we take an initial step toward solving this problem by constructing a dataset specifically designed for long-context hallucination detection. Furthermore, we propose a novel architecture that enables pre-trained encoder models, such as BERT, to process long contexts and effectively detect contextual hallucinations through a decomposition and aggregation mechanism. Our experimental results show that the proposed architecture significantly outperforms previous models of similar size as well as LLM-based models across various metrics, while providing substantially faster inference.
2025-04-28T03:47:05Z
Siyi Liu
Kishaloy Halder
Zheng Qi
Wei Xiao
Nikolaos Pappas
Phu Mon Htut
Neha Anna John
Yassine Benajiba
Dan Roth
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19467v4
BRIDGE: Benchmarking Large Language Models for Understanding Real-world Clinical Practice Text
2026-03-29T16:00:58Z
Large language models (LLMs) hold great promise for medical applications and are evolving rapidly, with new models being released at an accelerated pace. However, benchmarking on large-scale real-world data such as electronic health records (EHRs) is critical, as clinical decisions are directly informed by these sources, yet current evaluations remain limited. Most existing benchmarks rely on medical exam-style questions or PubMed-derived text, failing to capture the complexity of real-world clinical data. Others focus narrowly on specific application scenarios, limiting their generalizability across broader clinical use. To address this gap, we present BRIDGE, a comprehensive multilingual benchmark comprising 87 tasks sourced from real-world clinical data sources across nine languages. It covers eight major task types spanning the entire continuum of patient care across six clinical stages and 20 representative applications, including triage and referral, consultation, information extraction, diagnosis, prognosis, and billing coding, and involves 14 clinical specialties. We systematically evaluated 95 LLMs (including DeepSeek-R1, GPT-4o, Gemini series, and Qwen3 series) under various inference strategies. Our results reveal substantial performance variation across model sizes, languages, natural language processing tasks, and clinical specialties. Notably, we demonstrate that open-source LLMs can achieve performance comparable to proprietary models, while medically fine-tuned LLMs based on older architectures often underperform versus updated general-purpose models. The BRIDGE and its corresponding leaderboard serve as a foundational resource and a unique reference for the development and evaluation of new LLMs in real-world clinical text understanding.
The BRIDGE leaderboard: https://huggingface.co/spaces/YLab-Open/BRIDGE-Medical-Leaderboard
2025-04-28T04:13:18Z
Jiageng Wu
Bowen Gu
Ren Zhou
Kevin Xie
Doug Snyder
Yixing Jiang
Valentina Carducci
Richard Wyss
Rishi J Desai
Emily Alsentzer
Leo Anthony Celi
Adam Rodman
Sebastian Schneeweiss
Jonathan H. Chen
Santiago Romero-Brufau
Kueiyu Joshua Lin
Jie Yang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19475v3
Prisma: An Open Source Toolkit for Mechanistic Interpretability in Vision and Video
2025-06-03T06:43:53Z
Robust tooling and publicly available pre-trained models have helped drive recent advances in mechanistic interpretability for language models. However, similar progress in vision mechanistic interpretability has been hindered by the lack of accessible frameworks and pre-trained weights. We present Prisma (Access the codebase here: https://github.com/Prisma-Multimodal/ViT-Prisma), an open-source framework designed to accelerate vision mechanistic interpretability research, providing a unified toolkit for accessing 75+ vision and video transformers; support for sparse autoencoder (SAE), transcoder, and crosscoder training; a suite of 80+ pre-trained SAE weights; activation caching, circuit analysis tools, and visualization tools; and educational resources. Our analysis reveals surprising findings, including that effective vision SAEs can exhibit substantially lower sparsity patterns than language SAEs, and that in some instances, SAE reconstructions can decrease model loss. Prisma enables new research directions for understanding vision model internals while lowering barriers to entry in this emerging field.
2025-04-28T04:31:24Z
4 pages, 3 figures, 9 tables. Oral and Tutorial at the CVPR Mechanistic Interpretability for Vision (MIV) Workshop
Sonia Joseph
Praneet Suresh
Lorenz Hufe
Edward Stevinson
Robert Graham
Yash Vadi
Danilo Bzdok
Sebastian Lapuschkin
Lee Sharkey
Blake Aaron Richards
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19480v1
An Automated Reinforcement Learning Reward Design Framework with Large Language Model for Cooperative Platoon Coordination
2025-04-28T04:41:15Z
Reinforcement Learning (RL) has demonstrated excellent decision-making potential in platoon coordination problems. However, due to the variability of coordination goals, the complexity of the decision problem, and the time-consumption of trial-and-error in manual design, finding a well performance reward function to guide RL training to solve complex platoon coordination problems remains challenging. In this paper, we formally define the Platoon Coordination Reward Design Problem (PCRDP), extending the RL-based cooperative platoon coordination problem to incorporate automated reward function generation. To address PCRDP, we propose a Large Language Model (LLM)-based Platoon coordination Reward Design (PCRD) framework, which systematically automates reward function discovery through LLM-driven initialization and iterative optimization. In this method, LLM first initializes reward functions based on environment code and task requirements with an Analysis and Initial Reward (AIR) module, and then iteratively optimizes them based on training feedback with an evolutionary module. The AIR module guides LLM to deepen their understanding of code and tasks through a chain of thought, effectively mitigating hallucination risks in code generation. The evolutionary module fine-tunes and reconstructs the reward function, achieving a balance between exploration diversity and convergence stability for training. To validate our approach, we establish six challenging coordination scenarios with varying complexity levels within the Yangtze River Delta transportation network simulation. Comparative experimental results demonstrate that RL agents utilizing PCRD-generated reward functions consistently outperform human-engineered reward functions, achieving an average of 10\% higher performance metrics in all scenarios.
2025-04-28T04:41:15Z
Dixiao Wei
Peng Yi
Jinlong Lei
Yiguang Hong
Yuchuan Du
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19483v1
Improving Reasoning Performance in Large Language Models via Representation Engineering
2025-04-28T04:58:43Z
Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have resulted in increasingly anthropomorphic language concerning the ability of LLMs to reason. Whether reasoning in LLMs should be understood to be inherently different is, however, widely debated. We propose utilizing a representation engineering approach wherein model activations are read from the residual stream of an LLM when processing a reasoning task. The activations are used to derive a control vector that is applied to the model as an inference-time intervention, modulating the representational space of the model, to improve performance on the specified task. We publish the code for deriving control vectors and analyzing model representations. The method allows us to improve performance on reasoning benchmarks and assess how control vectors influence the final logit distribution of a model via metrics such as KL divergence and entropy. We apply control vectors to Mistral-7B-Instruct and a range of Pythia models on an inductive, a deductive and mathematical reasoning task. We show that an LLM can, to a certain degree, be controlled to improve its perceived reasoning ability by modulating activations. The intervention is dependent upon the ability to reliably extract the model's typical state when correctly solving a task. Our results suggest that reasoning performance can be modulated in the same manner as other information-processing tasks performed by LLMs and demonstrate that we are capable of improving performance on specific tasks via a simple intervention on the residual stream with no additional training.
2025-04-28T04:58:43Z
Has been accepted at "The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2025)" Link to publication: https://openreview.net/forum?id=IssPhpUsKt
13th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR 2025)
Bertram Højer
Oliver Jarvis
Stefan Heinrich
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.01440v1
Interactive Double Deep Q-network: Integrating Human Interventions and Evaluative Predictions in Reinforcement Learning of Autonomous Driving
2025-04-28T05:25:18Z
Integrating human expertise with machine learning is crucial for applications demanding high accuracy and safety, such as autonomous driving. This study introduces Interactive Double Deep Q-network (iDDQN), a Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) approach that enhances Reinforcement Learning (RL) by merging human insights directly into the RL training process, improving model performance. Our proposed iDDQN method modifies the Q-value update equation to integrate human and agent actions, establishing a collaborative approach for policy development. Additionally, we present an offline evaluative framework that simulates the agent's trajectory as if no human intervention had occurred, to assess the effectiveness of human interventions. Empirical results in simulated autonomous driving scenarios demonstrate that iDDQN outperforms established approaches, including Behavioral Cloning (BC), HG-DAgger, Deep Q-Learning from Demonstrations (DQfD), and vanilla DRL in leveraging human expertise for improving performance and adaptability.
2025-04-28T05:25:18Z
Accepted at IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV) 2025, 8 pages
Alkis Sygkounas
Ioannis Athanasiadis
Andreas Persson
Michael Felsberg
Amy Loutfi
10.1109/iv64158.2025.11097638
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21036v2
Can Differentially Private Fine-tuning LLMs Protect Against Privacy Attacks?
2025-05-01T10:10:01Z
Fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) has become an essential strategy for adapting them to specialized tasks; however, this process introduces significant privacy challenges, as sensitive training data may be inadvertently memorized and exposed. Although differential privacy (DP) offers strong theoretical guarantees against such leakage, its empirical privacy effectiveness on LLMs remains unclear, especially under different fine-tuning methods. In this paper, we systematically investigate the impact of DP across fine-tuning methods and privacy budgets, using both data extraction and membership inference attacks to assess empirical privacy risks. Our main findings are as follows: (1) Differential privacy reduces model utility, but its impact varies significantly across different fine-tuning methods. (2) Without DP, the privacy risks of models fine-tuned with different approaches differ considerably. (3) When DP is applied, even a relatively high privacy budget can substantially lower privacy risk. (4) The privacy-utility trade-off under DP training differs greatly among fine-tuning methods, with some methods being unsuitable for DP due to severe utility degradation. Our results provide practical guidance for privacy-conscious deployment of LLMs and pave the way for future research on optimizing the privacy-utility trade-off in fine-tuning methodologies.
2025-04-28T05:34:53Z
accepted by DBSec25
Hao Du
Shang Liu
Yang Cao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19496v1
DISCO: learning to DISCover an evolution Operator for multi-physics-agnostic prediction
2025-04-28T05:36:52Z
We address the problem of predicting the next state of a dynamical system governed by unknown temporal partial differential equations (PDEs) using only a short trajectory. While standard transformers provide a natural black-box solution to this task, the presence of a well-structured evolution operator in the data suggests a more tailored and efficient approach. Specifically, when the PDE is fully known, classical numerical solvers can evolve the state accurately with only a few parameters. Building on this observation, we introduce DISCO, a model that uses a large hypernetwork to process a short trajectory and generate the parameters of a much smaller operator network, which then predicts the next state through time integration. Our framework decouples dynamics estimation (i.e., DISCovering an evolution operator from a short trajectory) from state prediction (i.e., evolving this operator). Experiments show that pretraining our model on diverse physics datasets achieves state-of-the-art performance while requiring significantly fewer epochs. Moreover, it generalizes well and remains competitive when fine-tuned on downstream tasks.
2025-04-28T05:36:52Z
Rudy Morel
Jiequn Han
Edouard Oyallon
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19499v1
Graph Reinforcement Learning for QoS-Aware Load Balancing in Open Radio Access Networks
2025-04-28T05:41:31Z
Next-generation wireless cellular networks are expected to provide unparalleled Quality-of-Service (QoS) for emerging wireless applications, necessitating strict performance guarantees, e.g., in terms of link-level data rates. A critical challenge in meeting these QoS requirements is the prevention of cell congestion, which involves balancing the load to ensure sufficient radio resources are available for each cell to serve its designated User Equipments (UEs). In this work, a novel QoS-aware Load Balancing (LB) approach is developed to optimize the performance of Guaranteed Bit Rate (GBR) and Best Effort (BE) traffic in a multi-band Open Radio Access Network (O-RAN) under QoS and resource constraints. The proposed solution builds on Graph Reinforcement Learning (GRL), a powerful framework at the intersection of Graph Neural Network (GNN) and RL. The QoS-aware LB is modeled as a Markov Decision Process, with states represented as graphs. QoS consideration are integrated into both state representations and reward signal design. The LB agent is then trained using an off-policy dueling Deep Q Network (DQN) that leverages a GNN-based architecture. This design ensures the LB policy is invariant to the ordering of nodes (UE or cell), flexible in handling various network sizes, and capable of accounting for spatial node dependencies in LB decisions. Performance of the GRL-based solution is compared with two baseline methods. Results show substantial performance gains, including a $53\%$ reduction in QoS violations and a fourfold increase in the 5th percentile rate for BE traffic.
2025-04-28T05:41:31Z
To be published in the proceedings of the 2025 IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Seventh Workshop on Data Driven Intelligence for Networks and Systems (DDINS)
Omid Semiari
Hosein Nikopour
Shilpa Talwar
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00031v1
Learning to Plan Before Answering: Self-Teaching LLMs to Learn Abstract Plans for Problem Solving
2025-04-28T06:32:58Z
In the field of large language model (LLM) post-training, the effectiveness of utilizing synthetic data generated by the LLM itself has been well-presented. However, a key question remains unaddressed: what essential information should such self-generated data encapsulate? Existing approaches only produce step-by-step problem solutions, and fail to capture the abstract meta-knowledge necessary for generalization across similar problems. Drawing insights from cognitive science, where humans employ high-level abstraction to simplify complex problems before delving into specifics, we introduce a novel self-training algorithm: LEarning to Plan before Answering (LEPA). LEPA trains the LLM to formulate anticipatory plans, which serve as abstract meta-knowledge for problem-solving, before engaging with the intricacies of problems. This approach not only outlines the solution generation path but also shields the LLM from the distraction of irrelevant details. During data generation, LEPA first crafts an anticipatory plan based on the problem, and then generates a solution that aligns with both the plan and the problem. LEPA refines the plan through self-reflection, aiming to acquire plans that are instrumental in yielding correct solutions. During model optimization, the LLM is trained to predict both the refined plans and the corresponding solutions. By efficiently extracting and utilizing the anticipatory plans, LEPA demonstrates remarkable superiority over conventional algorithms on various challenging natural language reasoning benchmarks.
2025-04-28T06:32:58Z
Jin Zhang
Flood Sung
Zhilin Yang
Yang Gao
Chongjie Zhang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20117v2
ResearchCodeAgent: An LLM Multi-Agent System for Automated Codification of Research Methodologies
2025-05-03T16:45:38Z
In this paper we introduce ResearchCodeAgent, a novel multi-agent system leveraging large language models (LLMs) agents to automate the codification of research methodologies described in machine learning literature. The system bridges the gap between high-level research concepts and their practical implementation, allowing researchers auto-generating code of existing research papers for benchmarking or building on top-of existing methods specified in the literature with availability of partial or complete starter code. ResearchCodeAgent employs a flexible agent architecture with a comprehensive action suite, enabling context-aware interactions with the research environment. The system incorporates a dynamic planning mechanism, utilizing both short and long-term memory to adapt its approach iteratively. We evaluate ResearchCodeAgent on three distinct machine learning tasks with distinct task complexity and representing different parts of the ML pipeline: data augmentation, optimization, and data batching. Our results demonstrate the system's effectiveness and generalizability, with 46.9% of generated code being high-quality and error-free, and 25% showing performance improvements over baseline implementations. Empirical analysis shows an average reduction of 57.9% in coding time compared to manual implementation. We observe higher gains for more complex tasks. ResearchCodeAgent represents a significant step towards automating the research implementation process, potentially accelerating the pace of machine learning research.
2025-04-28T07:18:45Z
AI4Research Workshop @ AAAI 2025
Shubham Gandhi
Dhruv Shah
Manasi Patwardhan
Lovekesh Vig
Gautam Shroff
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.06245v2
A Transformer-Based Approach for Diagnosing Fault Cases in Optical Fiber Amplifiers
2025-06-23T06:06:01Z
A transformer-based deep learning approach is presented that enables the diagnosis of fault cases in optical fiber amplifiers using condition-based monitoring time series data. The model, Inverse Triple-Aspect Self-Attention Transformer (ITST), uses an encoder-decoder architecture, utilizing three feature extraction paths in the encoder, feature-engineered data for the decoder and a self-attention mechanism. The results show that ITST outperforms state-of-the-art models in terms of classification accuracy, which enables predictive maintenance for optical fiber amplifiers, reducing network downtimes and maintenance costs.
2025-04-28T07:57:28Z
This paper has been accepted for publication at the 25th International Conference on Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON) 2025
2025 25th Anniversary International Conference on Transparent Optical Networks (ICTON)
Dominic Schneider
Lutz Rapp
Christoph Ament
10.1109/ICTON67126.2025.11125083
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19556v1
Detecting Effects of AI-Mediated Communication on Language Complexity and Sentiment
2025-04-28T08:01:38Z
Given the subtle human-like effects of large language models on linguistic patterns, this study examines shifts in language over time to detect the impact of AI-mediated communication (AI- MC) on social media. We compare a replicated dataset of 970,919 tweets from 2020 (pre-ChatGPT) with 20,000 tweets from the same period in 2024, all of which mention Donald Trump during election periods. Using a combination of Flesch-Kincaid readability and polarity scores, we analyze changes in text complexity and sentiment. Our findings reveal a significant increase in mean sentiment polarity (0.12 vs. 0.04) and a shift from predominantly neutral content (54.8% in 2020 to 39.8% in 2024) to more positive expressions (28.6% to 45.9%). These findings suggest not only an increasing presence of AI in social media communication but also its impact on language and emotional expression patterns.
2025-04-28T08:01:38Z
5 pages, 3 figures, Companion Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference 2025
Kristen Sussman
Daniel Carter
10.1145/3701716.3717543
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19561v1
Quantifying Memory Utilization with Effective State-Size
2025-04-28T08:12:30Z
The need to develop a general framework for architecture analysis is becoming increasingly important, given the expanding design space of sequence models. To this end, we draw insights from classical signal processing and control theory, to develop a quantitative measure of \textit{memory utilization}: the internal mechanisms through which a model stores past information to produce future outputs. This metric, which we call \textbf{\textit{effective state-size}} (ESS), is tailored to the fundamental class of systems with \textit{input-invariant} and \textit{input-varying linear operators}, encompassing a variety of computational units such as variants of attention, convolutions, and recurrences. Unlike prior work on memory utilization, which either relies on raw operator visualizations (e.g. attention maps), or simply the total \textit{memory capacity} (i.e. cache size) of a model, our metrics provide highly interpretable and actionable measurements. In particular, we show how ESS can be leveraged to improve initialization strategies, inform novel regularizers and advance the performance-efficiency frontier through model distillation. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the effect of context delimiters (such as end-of-speech tokens) on ESS highlights cross-architectural differences in how large language models utilize their available memory to recall information. Overall, we find that ESS provides valuable insights into the dynamics that dictate memory utilization, enabling the design of more efficient and effective sequence models.
2025-04-28T08:12:30Z
Rom N. Parnichkun
Neehal Tumma
Armin W. Thomas
Alessandro Moro
Qi An
Taiji Suzuki
Atsushi Yamashita
Michael Poli
Stefano Massaroli
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19565v3
Knowledge-Driven Agentic Scientific Corpus Distillation Framework for Biomedical Large Language Models Training
2025-12-18T08:07:40Z
Corpus distillation for biomedical large language models (LLMs) seeks to address the pressing challenge of insufficient quantity and quality in open-source annotated scientific corpora, which remains a bottleneck for effective LLM training in biomedical research. This paper proposes a knowledge-driven, agentic framework for scientific corpus distillation, tailored explicitly for LLM training in the biomedical domain, addressing the challenge posed by the complex hierarchy of biomedical knowledge. Central to our approach is a collaborative multi-agent architecture, where specialized agents, each guided by the Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) hierarchy, work in concert to autonomously extract, synthesize, and self-evaluate high-quality textual data from vast scientific literature. This agentic framework collectively generates and refines domain-specific question-answer pairs, ensuring comprehensive coverage and consistency with biomedical ontologies while minimizing manual involvement. Extensive experimental results show that language models trained on our multi-agent distilled datasets achieve notable improvements in biomedical question-answering tasks, outperforming both strong life sciences LLM baselines and advanced proprietary models. Notably, our AI-Ready dataset enables Llama3-70B to surpass GPT-4 with MedPrompt and Med-PaLM-2, despite their larger scale. Detailed ablation studies and case analyses further validate the effectiveness and synergy of each agent within the framework, highlighting the potential of multi-agent collaboration in biomedical LLM training.
2025-04-28T08:18:24Z
Biomedical Large Language Models, Agentic Corpus Distillation, Synthetic Question-Answer Generation, Agentic AI, Knowledge Hierarchy Guidance
Meng Xiao
Xunxin Cai
Qingqing Long
Chengrui Wang
Yuanchun Zhou
Hengshu Zhu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19583v2
Graph-Based Spectral Decomposition for Parameter Coordination in Language Model Fine-Tuning
2025-06-01T22:38:52Z
This paper proposes a parameter collaborative optimization algorithm for large language models, enhanced with graph spectral analysis. The goal is to improve both fine-tuning efficiency and structural awareness during training. In the proposed method, the parameters of a pre-trained language model are treated as nodes in a graph. A weighted graph is constructed, and Laplacian spectral decomposition is applied to enable frequency-domain modeling and structural representation of the parameter space. Based on this structure, a joint loss function is designed. It combines the task loss with a spectral regularization term to facilitate collaborative updates among parameters. In addition, a spectral filtering mechanism is introduced during the optimization phase. This mechanism adjusts gradients in a structure-aware manner, enhancing the model's training stability and convergence behavior. The method is evaluated on multiple tasks, including traditional fine-tuning comparisons, few-shot generalization tests, and convergence speed analysis. In all settings, the proposed approach demonstrates superior performance. The experimental results confirm that the spectral collaborative optimization framework effectively reduces parameter perturbations and improves fine-tuning quality while preserving overall model performance. This work contributes significantly to the field of artificial intelligence by advancing parameter-efficient training methodologies for large-scale models, reinforcing the importance of structural signal processing in deep learning optimization, and offering a robust, generalizable framework for enhancing language model adaptability and performance.
2025-04-28T08:42:35Z
Hanlu Zhang
Yumeng Ma
Shuo Wang
Guiran Liu
Binrong Zhu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2505.00032v1
MDD-LLM: Towards Accuracy Large Language Models for Major Depressive Disorder Diagnosis
2025-04-28T08:53:55Z
Major depressive disorder (MDD) impacts more than 300 million people worldwide, highlighting a significant public health issue. However, the uneven distribution of medical resources and the complexity of diagnostic methods have resulted in inadequate attention to this disorder in numerous countries and regions. This paper introduces a high-performance MDD diagnosis tool named MDD-LLM, an AI-driven framework that utilizes fine-tuned large language models (LLMs) and extensive real-world samples to tackle challenges in MDD diagnosis. Therefore, we select 274,348 individual information from the UK Biobank cohort to train and evaluate the proposed method. Specifically, we select 274,348 individual records from the UK Biobank cohort and design a tabular data transformation method to create a large corpus for training and evaluating the proposed approach. To illustrate the advantages of MDD-LLM, we perform comprehensive experiments and provide several comparative analyses against existing model-based solutions across multiple evaluation metrics. Experimental results show that MDD-LLM (70B) achieves an accuracy of 0.8378 and an AUC of 0.8919 (95% CI: 0.8799 - 0.9040), significantly outperforming existing machine learning and deep learning frameworks for MDD diagnosis. Given the limited exploration of LLMs in MDD diagnosis, we examine numerous factors that may influence the performance of our proposed method, such as tabular data transformation techniques and different fine-tuning strategies.
2025-04-28T08:53:55Z
Yuyang Sha
Hongxin Pan
Wei Xu
Weiyu Meng
Gang Luo
Xinyu Du
Xiaobing Zhai
Henry H. Y. Tong
Caijuan Shi
Kefeng Li
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19599v3
GVPO: Group Variance Policy Optimization for Large Language Model Post-Training
2025-10-27T10:30:01Z
Post-training plays a crucial role in refining and aligning large language models to meet specific tasks and human preferences. While recent advancements in post-training techniques, such as Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO), leverage increased sampling with relative reward scoring to achieve superior performance, these methods often suffer from training instability that limits their practical adoption. As a next step, we present Group Variance Policy Optimization (GVPO). GVPO incorporates the analytical solution to KL-constrained reward maximization directly into its gradient weights, ensuring alignment with the optimal policy. The method provides intuitive physical interpretations: its gradient mirrors the mean squared error between the central distance of implicit rewards and that of actual rewards. GVPO offers two key advantages: (1) it guarantees a unique optimal solution, exactly the KL-constrained reward maximization objective, (2) it supports flexible sampling distributions that avoids on-policy and importance sampling limitations. By unifying theoretical guarantees with practical adaptability, GVPO establishes a new paradigm for reliable and versatile LLM post-training.
2025-04-28T09:02:24Z
Accepted by NeurIPS 2025
Kaichen Zhang
Yuzhong Hong
Junwei Bao
Hongfei Jiang
Yang Song
Dingqian Hong
Hui Xiong
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19606v1
Coreference Resolution for Vietnamese Narrative Texts
2025-04-28T09:10:41Z
Coreference resolution is a vital task in natural language processing (NLP) that involves identifying and linking different expressions in a text that refer to the same entity. This task is particularly challenging for Vietnamese, a low-resource language with limited annotated datasets. To address these challenges, we developed a comprehensive annotated dataset using narrative texts from VnExpress, a widely-read Vietnamese online news platform. We established detailed guidelines for annotating entities, focusing on ensuring consistency and accuracy. Additionally, we evaluated the performance of large language models (LLMs), specifically GPT-3.5-Turbo and GPT-4, on this dataset. Our results demonstrate that GPT-4 significantly outperforms GPT-3.5-Turbo in terms of both accuracy and response consistency, making it a more reliable tool for coreference resolution in Vietnamese.
2025-04-28T09:10:41Z
Accepted at PACLIC 2024
Hieu-Dai Tran
Duc-Vu Nguyen
Ngan Luu-Thuy Nguyen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19625v1
Rulebook: bringing co-routines to reinforcement learning environments
2025-04-28T09:34:34Z
Reinforcement learning (RL) algorithms, due to their reliance on external systems to learn from, require digital environments (e.g., simulators) with very simple interfaces, which in turn constrain significantly the implementation of such environments. In particular, these environments are implemented either as separate processes or as state machines, leading to synchronization and communication overheads in the first case, and to unstructured programming in the second.
We propose a new domain-specific, co-routine-based, compiled language, called Rulebook, designed to automatically generate the state machine required to interact with machine learning (ML) algorithms and similar applications, with no performance overhead. Rulebook allows users to express programs without needing to be aware of the specific interface required by the ML components. By decoupling the execution model of the program from the syntactical encoding of the program, and thus without the need for manual state management, Rulebook allows to create larger and more sophisticated environments at a lower development cost.
2025-04-28T09:34:34Z
Massimo Fioravanti
Samuele Pasini
Giovanni Agosta
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19627v2
VCM: Vision Concept Modeling Based on Implicit Contrastive Learning with Vision-Language Instruction Fine-Tuning
2025-05-19T13:44:04Z
Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs) are pivotal for real-world AI tasks like embodied intelligence due to their strong vision-language reasoning abilities. However, current LVLMs process entire images at the token level, which is inefficient compared to humans who analyze information and generate content at the conceptual level, extracting relevant visual concepts with minimal effort. This inefficiency, stemming from the lack of a visual concept model, limits LVLMs' usability in real-world applications. To address this, we propose VCM, an end-to-end self-supervised visual concept modeling framework. VCM leverages implicit contrastive learning across multiple sampled instances and vision-language fine-tuning to construct a visual concept model without requiring costly concept-level annotations. Our results show that VCM significantly reduces computational costs (e.g., 85\% fewer FLOPs for LLaVA-1.5-7B) while maintaining strong performance across diverse image understanding tasks. Moreover, VCM enhances visual encoders' capabilities in classic visual concept perception tasks. Extensive quantitative and qualitative experiments validate the effectiveness and efficiency of VCM.
2025-04-28T09:39:07Z
VCM
Run Luo
Renke Shan
Longze Chen
Ziqiang Liu
Lu Wang
Min Yang
Xiaobo Xia
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19649v3
Intelligent4DSE: Optimizing High-Level Synthesis Design Space Exploration with Graph Neural Networks and Large Language Models
2025-10-15T11:24:32Z
High-Level Synthesis (HLS) Design Space Exploration (DSE) is essential for generating hardware designs that balance performance, power, and area (PPA). To optimize this process, existing works often employs message-passing neural networks (MPNNs) to predict quality of results (QoR). These predictors serve as evaluators in the DSE process, effectively bypassing the time-consuming estimations traditionally required by HLS tools. However, existing models based on MPNNs struggle with over-smoothing and limited expressiveness. Additionally, while meta-heuristic algorithms are widely used in DSE, they typically require extensive domain-specific knowledge to design operators and time-consuming tuning. To address these limitations, we propose ECoGNNs-LLMMHs, a framework that integrates graph neural networks with task-adaptive message passing and large language model-enhanced meta-heuristic algorithms. Compared with state-of-the-art works, ECoGNN exhibits lower prediction error in the post-HLS prediction task, with the error reduced by 57.27\%. For post-implementation prediction tasks, ECoGNN demonstrates the lowest prediction errors, with average reductions of 17.6\% for flip-flop (FF) usage, 33.7\% for critical path (CP) delay, 26.3\% for power consumption, 38.3\% for digital signal processor (DSP) utilization, and 40.8\% for BRAM usage. LLMMH variants can generate superior Pareto fronts compared to meta-heuristic algorithms in terms of average distance from the reference set (ADRS) with average improvements of 87.47\%, respectively. Compared with the SOTA DSE approaches GNN-DSE and IRONMAN-PRO, LLMMH can reduce the ADRS by 68.17\% and 63.07\% respectively.
2025-04-28T10:08:56Z
Lei Xu
Shanshan Wang
Emmanuel Casseau
Chenglong Xiao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19654v1
Transformation & Translation Occupancy Grid Mapping: 2-Dimensional Deep Learning Refined SLAM
2025-04-28T10:13:47Z
SLAM (Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping) is a crucial component for robotic systems, providing a map of an environment, the current location and previous trajectory of a robot. While 3D LiDAR SLAM has received notable improvements in recent years, 2D SLAM lags behind. Gradual drifts in odometry and pose estimation inaccuracies hinder modern 2D LiDAR-odometry algorithms in large complex environments. Dynamic robotic motion coupled with inherent estimation based SLAM processes introduce noise and errors, degrading map quality. Occupancy Grid Mapping (OGM) produces results that are often noisy and unclear. This is due to the fact that evidence based mapping represents maps according to uncertain observations. This is why OGMs are so popular in exploration or navigation tasks. However, this also limits OGMs' effectiveness for specific mapping based tasks such as floor plan creation in complex scenes. To address this, we propose our novel Transformation and Translation Occupancy Grid Mapping (TT-OGM). We adapt and enable accurate and robust pose estimation techniques from 3D SLAM to the world of 2D and mitigate errors to improve map quality using Generative Adversarial Networks (GANs). We introduce a novel data generation method via deep reinforcement learning (DRL) to build datasets large enough for training a GAN for SLAM error correction. We demonstrate our SLAM in real-time on data collected at Loughborough University. We also prove its generalisability on a variety of large complex environments on a collection of large scale well-known 2D occupancy maps. Our novel approach enables the creation of high quality OGMs in complex scenes, far surpassing the capabilities of current SLAM algorithms in terms of quality, accuracy and reliability.
2025-04-28T10:13:47Z
12 pages, preprint, submitted to Robotics And Autonomous Systems
Leon Davies
Baihua Li
Mohamad Saada
Simon Sølvsten
Qinggang Meng
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19667v3
Tripartite-GraphRAG via Plugin Ontologies
2025-09-09T10:38:54Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities across various domains, yet they struggle with knowledge-intensive tasks in areas that demand factual accuracy, e.g. industrial automation and healthcare. Key limitations include their tendency to hallucinate, lack of source traceability (provenance), and challenges in timely knowledge updates. Combining language models with knowledge graphs (GraphRAG) offers promising avenues for overcoming these deficits. However, a major challenge lies in creating such a knowledge graph in the first place. Here, we propose a novel approach that combines LLMs with a tripartite knowledge graph representation, which is constructed by connecting complex, domain-specific objects via a curated ontology of corresponding, domain-specific concepts to relevant sections within chunks of text through a concept-anchored pre-analysis of source documents starting from an initial lexical graph. Subsequently, we formulate LLM prompt creation as an unsupervised node classification problem allowing for the optimization of information density, coverage, and arrangement of LLM prompts at significantly reduced lengths. An initial experimental evaluation of our approach on a healthcare use case, involving multi-faceted analyses of patient anamneses given a set of medical concepts as well as a series of clinical guideline literature, indicates its potential to optimize information density, coverage, and arrangement of LLM prompts while significantly reducing their lengths, which, in turn, may lead to reduced costs as well as more consistent and reliable LLM outputs.
2025-04-28T10:43:35Z
Michael Banf
Johannes Kuhn
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19675v2
Annif at SemEval-2025 Task 5: Traditional XMTC augmented by LLMs
2025-08-21T14:43:26Z
This paper presents the Annif system in SemEval-2025 Task 5 (LLMs4Subjects), which focussed on subject indexing using large language models (LLMs). The task required creating subject predictions for bibliographic records from the bilingual TIBKAT database using the GND subject vocabulary. Our approach combines traditional natural language processing and machine learning techniques implemented in the Annif toolkit with innovative LLM-based methods for translation and synthetic data generation, and merging predictions from monolingual models. The system ranked first in the all-subjects category and second in the tib-core-subjects category in the quantitative evaluation, and fourth in qualitative evaluations. These findings demonstrate the potential of combining traditional XMTC algorithms with modern LLM techniques to improve the accuracy and efficiency of subject indexing in multilingual contexts.
2025-04-28T11:04:23Z
6 pages, 4 figures, published at SemEval-2025 workshop Task 5: LLMs4Subjects: https://aclanthology.org/2025.semeval-1.315/
Proceedings of the 19th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2025), 2424--2431
Osma Suominen
Juho Inkinen
Mona Lehtinen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19678v2
From LLM Reasoning to Autonomous AI Agents: A Comprehensive Review
2026-03-06T19:01:27Z
Large language models and autonomous AI agents have evolved rapidly, resulting in a diverse array of evaluation benchmarks, frameworks, and collaboration protocols. Driven by the growing need for standardized evaluation and integration, we systematically consolidate these fragmented efforts into a unified framework. However, the landscape remains fragmented and lacks a unified taxonomy or comprehensive survey. Therefore, we present a side-by-side comparison of benchmarks developed between 2019 and 2025 that evaluate these models and agents across multiple domains. In addition, we propose a taxonomy of approximately 60 benchmarks that cover general and academic knowledge reasoning, mathematical problem-solving, code generation and software engineering, factual grounding and retrieval, domain-specific evaluations, multimodal and embodied tasks, task orchestration, and interactive assessments. Furthermore, we review AI-agent frameworks introduced between 2023 and 2025 that integrate large language models with modular toolkits to enable autonomous decision-making and multi-step reasoning. Moreover, we present real-world applications of autonomous AI agents in materials science, biomedical research, academic ideation, software engineering, synthetic data generation, chemical reasoning, mathematical problem-solving, geographic information systems, multimedia, healthcare, and finance. We then survey key agent-to-agent collaboration protocols, namely the Agent Communication Protocol (ACP), the Model Context Protocol (MCP), and the Agent-to-Agent Protocol (A2A). Finally, we discuss recommendations for future research, focusing on advanced reasoning strategies, failure modes in multi-agent LLM systems, automated scientific discovery, dynamic tool integration via reinforcement learning, integrated search capabilities, and security vulnerabilities in agent protocols.
2025-04-28T11:08:22Z
Mohamed Amine Ferrag
Norbert Tihanyi
Merouane Debbah
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19684v2
ClearVision: Leveraging CycleGAN and SigLIP-2 for Robust All-Weather Classification in Traffic Camera Imagery
2025-05-01T22:56:11Z
Adverse weather conditions challenge safe transportation, necessitating robust real-time weather detection from traffic camera imagery. We propose a novel framework combining CycleGAN-based domain adaptation with efficient contrastive learning to enhance weather classification, particularly in low-light nighttime conditions. Our approach leverages the lightweight SigLIP-2 model, which employs pairwise sigmoid loss to reduce computational demands, integrated with CycleGAN to transform nighttime images into day-like representations while preserving weather cues. Evaluated on an Iowa Department of Transportation dataset, the baseline EVA-02 model with CLIP achieves a per-class overall accuracy of 96.55\% across three weather conditions (No Precipitation, Rain, Snow) and a day/night overall accuracy of 96.55\%, but shows a significant day-night gap (97.21\% day vs.\ 63.40\% night). With CycleGAN, EVA-02 improves to 97.01\% per-class accuracy and 96.85\% day/night accuracy, boosting nighttime performance to 82.45\%. Our Vision-SigLIP-2 + Text-SigLIP-2 + CycleGAN + Contrastive configuration excels in nighttime scenarios, achieving the highest nighttime accuracy of 85.90\%, with 94.00\% per-class accuracy and 93.35\% day/night accuracy. This model reduces training time by 89\% (from 6 hours to 40 minutes) and inference time by 80\% (from 15 seconds to 3 seconds) compared to EVA-02. By narrowing the day-night performance gap from 33.81 to 8.90 percentage points, our framework provides a scalable, efficient solution for all-weather classification using existing camera infrastructure.
2025-04-28T11:22:08Z
2025 IEEE 28th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Anush Lakshman Sivaraman
Kojo Adu-Gyamfi
Ibne Farabi Shihab
Anuj Sharma
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19715v2
Model-based controller assisted domain randomization for transient vibration suppression of nonlinear powertrain system with parametric uncertainty
2026-02-12T11:05:24Z
Complex mechanical systems such as vehicle powertrains are inherently subject to multiple nonlinearities and uncertainties arising from parametric variations. Modeling errors are therefore unavoidable, making the transfer of control systems from simulation to real-world systems a critical challenge. Traditional robust controls have limitations in handling certain types of nonlinearities and uncertainties, requiring a more practical approach capable of comprehensively compensating for these various constraints. This study proposes a new robust control approach using the framework of deep reinforcement learning (DRL). The key strategy lies in the synergy among domain randomization-based DRL, long short-term memory (LSTM)-based actor and critic networks, and model-based control (MBC). The problem setup is modeled via the latent Markov decision process (LMDP), a set of vanilla MDPs, for a controlled system subject to uncertainties and nonlinearities. In LMDP, the dynamics of an environment simulator is randomized during training to improve the robustness of the control system to real testing environments. The randomization increases training difficulties as well as conservativeness of the resultant control system; therefore, progress is assisted by concurrent use of a model-based controller based on a physics-based system model. Compared to traditional DRL-based controls, the proposed approach is smarter in that we can achieve a high level of generalization ability with a more compact neural network architecture and a smaller amount of training data. The controller is verified via practical application to active damping for a complex powertrain system with nonlinearities and parametric variations. Comparative tests demonstrate the high robustness of the proposed approach.
2025-04-28T12:09:07Z
Heisei Yonezawa
Ansei Yonezawa
Itsuro Kajiwara
10.1016/j.ymssp.2025.113570
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19720v1
Taming the Titans: A Survey of Efficient LLM Inference Serving
2025-04-28T12:14:02Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) for Generative AI have achieved remarkable progress, evolving into sophisticated and versatile tools widely adopted across various domains and applications. However, the substantial memory overhead caused by their vast number of parameters, combined with the high computational demands of the attention mechanism, poses significant challenges in achieving low latency and high throughput for LLM inference services. Recent advancements, driven by groundbreaking research, have significantly accelerated progress in this field. This paper provides a comprehensive survey of these methods, covering fundamental instance-level approaches, in-depth cluster-level strategies, emerging scenario directions, and other miscellaneous but important areas. At the instance level, we review model placement, request scheduling, decoding length prediction, storage management, and the disaggregation paradigm. At the cluster level, we explore GPU cluster deployment, multi-instance load balancing, and cloud service solutions. For emerging scenarios, we organize the discussion around specific tasks, modules, and auxiliary methods. To ensure a holistic overview, we also highlight several niche yet critical areas. Finally, we outline potential research directions to further advance the field of LLM inference serving.
2025-04-28T12:14:02Z
work in progress;11 pages of main paper with 7 main figures, overall 20 pages
Ranran Zhen
Juntao Li
Yixin Ji
Zhenlin Yang
Tong Liu
Qingrong Xia
Xinyu Duan
Zhefeng Wang
Baoxing Huai
Min Zhang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19730v1
Evaluate-and-Purify: Fortifying Code Language Models Against Adversarial Attacks Using LLM-as-a-Judge
2025-04-28T12:28:55Z
The widespread adoption of code language models in software engineering tasks has exposed vulnerabilities to adversarial attacks, especially the identifier substitution attacks. Although existing identifier substitution attackers demonstrate high success rates, they often produce adversarial examples with unnatural code patterns. In this paper, we systematically assess the quality of adversarial examples using LLM-as-a-Judge. Our analysis reveals that over 80% of adversarial examples generated by state-of-the-art identifier substitution attackers (e.g., ALERT) are actually detectable. Based on this insight, we propose EP-Shield, a unified framework for evaluating and purifying identifier substitution attacks via naturalness-aware reasoning. Specifically, we first evaluate the naturalness of code and identify the perturbed adversarial code, then purify it so that the victim model can restore correct prediction. Extensive experiments demonstrate the superiority of EP-Shield over adversarial fine-tuning (up to 83.36% improvement) and its lightweight design 7B parameters) with GPT-4-level performance.
2025-04-28T12:28:55Z
25 pages, 6 figures
Wenhan Mu
Ling Xu
Shuren Pei
Le Mi
Huichi Zhou
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19734v1
LLM-Assisted Automated Deductive Coding of Dialogue Data: Leveraging Dialogue-Specific Characteristics to Enhance Contextual Understanding
2025-04-28T12:31:38Z
Dialogue data has been a key source for understanding learning processes, offering critical insights into how students engage in collaborative discussions and how these interactions shape their knowledge construction. The advent of Large Language Models (LLMs) has introduced promising opportunities for advancing qualitative research, particularly in the automated coding of dialogue data. However, the inherent contextual complexity of dialogue presents unique challenges for these models, especially in understanding and interpreting complex contextual information. This study addresses these challenges by developing a novel LLM-assisted automated coding approach for dialogue data. The novelty of our proposed framework is threefold: 1) We predict the code for an utterance based on dialogue-specific characteristics -- communicative acts and communicative events -- using separate prompts following the role prompts and chain-of-thoughts methods; 2) We engaged multiple LLMs including GPT-4-turbo, GPT-4o, DeepSeek in collaborative code prediction; 3) We leveraged the interrelation between events and acts to implement consistency checking using GPT-4o. In particular, our contextual consistency checking provided a substantial accuracy improvement. We also found the accuracy of act predictions was consistently higher than that of event predictions. This study contributes a new methodological framework for enhancing the precision of automated coding of dialogue data as well as offers a scalable solution for addressing the contextual challenges inherent in dialogue analysis.
2025-04-28T12:31:38Z
Ying Na
Shihui Feng
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19740v1
Graph Fourier Transformer with Structure-Frequency Information
2025-04-28T12:38:02Z
Graph Transformers (GTs) have shown advantages in numerous graph structure tasks but their self-attention mechanism ignores the generalization bias of graphs, with existing methods mainly compensating for this bias from aspects like position encoding, attention bias and relative distance yet still having sub-optimal performance and being insufficient by only considering the structural perspective of generalization bias. To address this, this paper proposes Grafourierformer, which innovatively combines GT with inductive bias containing Frequency-Structure information by applying Graph Fourier Transform to the Attention Matrix: specifically, eigenvalues from the Graph Laplacian matrix are used to construct an Eigenvalue matrix mask (reflecting node positions and structural relationships with neighboring nodes to enable consideration of node range structural characteristics and focus on local graph details), and inverse Fourier transform is employed to extract node high-frequency and low-frequency features, calculate low-frequency and high-frequency energy, and construct a node frequency-energy matrix to filter the eigenvalue matrix mask, allowing attention heads to incorporate both graph structural information and node frequency information optimization, adaptively distinguish global trends from local details, and effectively suppress redundant information interference. Extensive experiments on various benchmarks show Grafourierformer consistently outperforms GNN and GT-based models in graph classification and node classification tasks, with ablation experiments further validating the effectiveness and necessity of the method. Codes are available at https://github.com/Arichibald/Grafourierformer.git
2025-04-28T12:38:02Z
Yonghui Zhai
Yang Zhang
Minghao Shang
Lihua Pang
Yaxin Ren
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19746v1
FineQ: Software-Hardware Co-Design for Low-Bit Fine-Grained Mixed-Precision Quantization of LLMs
2025-04-28T12:47:23Z
Large language models (LLMs) have significantly advanced the natural language processing paradigm but impose substantial demands on memory and computational resources. Quantization is one of the most effective ways to reduce memory consumption of LLMs. However, advanced single-precision quantization methods experience significant accuracy degradation when quantizing to ultra-low bits. Existing mixed-precision quantization methods are quantized by groups with coarse granularity. Employing high precision for group data leads to substantial memory overhead, whereas low precision severely impacts model accuracy. To address this issue, we propose FineQ, software-hardware co-design for low-bit fine-grained mixed-precision quantization of LLMs. First, FineQ partitions the weights into finer-grained clusters and considers the distribution of outliers within these clusters, thus achieving a balance between model accuracy and memory overhead. Then, we propose an outlier protection mechanism within clusters that uses 3 bits to represent outliers and introduce an encoding scheme for index and data concatenation to enable aligned memory access. Finally, we introduce an accelerator utilizing temporal coding that effectively supports the quantization algorithm while simplifying the multipliers in the systolic array. FineQ achieves higher model accuracy compared to the SOTA mixed-precision quantization algorithm at a close average bit-width. Meanwhile, the accelerator achieves up to 1.79x energy efficiency and reduces the area of the systolic array by 61.2%.
2025-04-28T12:47:23Z
DATE 2025
Xilong Xie
Liang Wang
Limin Xiao
Meng Han
Lin Sun
Shuai Zheng
Xiangrong Xu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19754v1
Reconstructing Context: Evaluating Advanced Chunking Strategies for Retrieval-Augmented Generation
2025-04-28T12:52:05Z
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has become a transformative approach for enhancing large language models (LLMs) by grounding their outputs in external knowledge sources. Yet, a critical question persists: how can vast volumes of external knowledge be managed effectively within the input constraints of LLMs? Traditional methods address this by chunking external documents into smaller, fixed-size segments. While this approach alleviates input limitations, it often fragments context, resulting in incomplete retrieval and diminished coherence in generation. To overcome these shortcomings, two advanced techniques, late chunking and contextual retrieval, have been introduced, both aiming to preserve global context. Despite their potential, their comparative strengths and limitations remain unclear. This study presents a rigorous analysis of late chunking and contextual retrieval, evaluating their effectiveness and efficiency in optimizing RAG systems. Our results indicate that contextual retrieval preserves semantic coherence more effectively but requires greater computational resources. In contrast, late chunking offers higher efficiency but tends to sacrifice relevance and completeness.
2025-04-28T12:52:05Z
13 pages, 2 figures, Second Workshop on Knowledge-Enhanced Information Retrieval, ECIR 2025
Carlo Merola
Jaspinder Singh
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19759v1
Moral Reasoning Across Languages: The Critical Role of Low-Resource Languages in LLMs
2025-04-28T12:56:36Z
In this paper, we introduce the Multilingual Moral Reasoning Benchmark (MMRB) to evaluate the moral reasoning abilities of large language models (LLMs) across five typologically diverse languages and three levels of contextual complexity: sentence, paragraph, and document. Our results show moral reasoning performance degrades with increasing context complexity, particularly for low-resource languages such as Vietnamese. We further fine-tune the open-source LLaMA-3-8B model using curated monolingual data for alignment and poisoning. Surprisingly, low-resource languages have a stronger impact on multilingual reasoning than high-resource ones, highlighting their critical role in multilingual NLP.
2025-04-28T12:56:36Z
5 pages, 2 figures
Huichi Zhou
Zehao Xu
Munan Zhao
Kaihong Li
Yiqiang Li
Hongtao Wang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19779v1
Learning Brenier Potentials with Convex Generative Adversarial Neural Networks
2025-04-28T13:24:52Z
Brenier proved that under certain conditions on a source and a target probability measure there exists a strictly convex function such that its gradient is a transport map from the source to the target distribution. This function is called the Brenier potential. Furthermore, detailed information on the Hölder regularity of the Brenier potential is available. In this work we develop the statistical learning theory of generative adversarial neural networks that learn the Brenier potential. As by the transformation of densities formula, the density of the generated measure depends on the second derivative of the Brenier potential, we develop the universal approximation theory of ReCU networks with cubic activation $\mathtt{ReCU}(x)=\max\{0,x\}^3$ that combines the favorable approximation properties of Hölder functions with a Lipschitz continuous density. In order to assure the convexity of such general networks, we introduce an adversarial training procedure for a potential function represented by the ReCU networks that combines the classical discriminator cross entropy loss with a penalty term that enforces (strict) convexity. We give a detailed decomposition of learning errors and show that for a suitable high penalty parameter all networks chosen in the adversarial min-max optimization problem are strictly convex. This is further exploited to prove the consistency of the learning procedure for (slowly) expanding network capacity. We also implement the described learning algorithm and apply it to a number of standard test cases from Gaussian mixture to image data as target distributions. As predicted in theory, we observe that the convexity loss becomes inactive during the training process and the potentials represented by the neural networks have learned convexity.
2025-04-28T13:24:52Z
Claudia Drygala
Hanno Gottschalk
Thomas Kruse
Ségolène Martin
Annika Mütze
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19792v1
Contextures: The Mechanism of Representation Learning
2025-04-28T13:36:28Z
This dissertation establishes the contexture theory to mathematically characterize the mechanism of representation learning, or pretraining. Despite the remarkable empirical success of foundation models, it is not very clear what representations they learn, and why these representations are useful for various downstream tasks. A scientific understanding of representation learning is critical, especially at this point when scaling up the model size is producing diminishing returns, and designing new pretraining methods is imperative for further progress.
Prior work treated different representation learning methods quite differently, whereas the contexture theory provides a unified framework for analyzing these methods. The central argument is that a representation is learned from the association between the input X and a context variable A. We prove that if an encoder captures the maximum information of this association, in which case we say that the encoder learns the contexture, then it will be optimal on the class of tasks that are compatible with the context. We also show that a context is the most useful when the association between X and A is neither too strong nor too weak. The important implication of the contexture theory is that increasing the model size alone will achieve diminishing returns, and further advancements require better contexts.
We demonstrate that many pretraining objectives can learn the contexture, including supervised learning, self-supervised learning, generative models, etc. Then, we introduce two general objectives -- SVME and KISE, for learning the contexture. We also show how to mix multiple contexts together, an effortless way to create better contexts from existing ones. Then, we prove statistical learning bounds for representation learning. Finally, we discuss the effect of the data distribution shift from pretraining to the downstream task.
2025-04-28T13:36:28Z
PhD Dissertation
Runtian Zhai
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19811v2
Can a Crow Hatch a Falcon? Lineage Matters in Predicting Large Language Model Performance
2025-08-08T11:53:19Z
Accurately forecasting the performance of Large Language Models (LLMs) before extensive fine-tuning or merging can substantially reduce both computational expense and development time. Although prior approaches like scaling laws account for global factors such as parameter size or training tokens, they often overlook explicit lineage relationships-i.e., which models are derived or merged from which parents. In this work, we propose a novel Lineage-Regularized Matrix Factorization (LRMF) framework that encodes ancestral ties among LLMs via a graph Laplacian regularizer. By leveraging multi-hop parent-child connections, LRMF consistently outperforms conventional matrix factorization and collaborative filtering methods in both instance-level and benchmark-level performance prediction. Our large-scale study includes 2,934 publicly available Hugging Face models and 21,000+ instances across 6 major benchmarks, showing that the introduction of lineage constraints yields up to 0.15-0.30 higher Pearson correlation coefficients with actual performance compared to baseline methods. Moreover, LRMF effectively addresses the cold-start problem, providing accurate estimates for newly derived or merged models even with minimal data. This lineage-guided strategy thus offers a resource-efficient way to inform hyperparameter tuning, data selection, and model combination in modern LLM development.
2025-04-28T14:08:45Z
Takuya Tamura
Taro Yano
Masafumi Enomoto
Masafumi Oyamada
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19820v2
Hierarchical Uncertainty-Aware Graph Neural Network
2025-05-05T07:47:54Z
Recent research on graph neural networks (GNNs) has explored mechanisms for capturing local uncertainty and exploiting graph hierarchies to mitigate data sparsity and leverage structural properties. However, the synergistic integration of these two approaches remains underexplored. This work introduces a novel architecture, the Hierarchical Uncertainty-Aware Graph Neural Network (HU-GNN), which unifies multi-scale representation learning, principled uncertainty estimation, and self-supervised embedding diversity within a single end-to-end framework. Specifically, HU-GNN adaptively forms node clusters and estimates uncertainty at multiple structural scales from individual nodes to higher levels. These uncertainty estimates guide a robust message-passing mechanism and attention weighting, effectively mitigating noise and adversarial perturbations while preserving predictive accuracy on semi-supervised classification tasks. We also offer key theoretical contributions, including a probabilistic formulation, rigorous uncertainty-calibration guarantees, and formal robustness bounds. Extensive experiments on standard benchmarks demonstrate that our model achieves state-of-the-art robustness and interpretability.
2025-04-28T14:22:18Z
Yoonhyuk Choi
Jiho Choi
Taewook Ko
Chong-Kwon Kim
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19856v3
Efficient Domain-adaptive Continual Pretraining for the Process Industry in the German Language
2025-07-01T09:47:53Z
Domain-adaptive continual pretraining (DAPT) is a state-of-the-art technique that further trains a language model (LM) on its pretraining task, e.g., masked language modeling (MLM), when common domain adaptation via LM fine-tuning is not possible due to a lack of labeled task data. Although popular, MLM requires a significant corpus of domain-related data, which is difficult to obtain for specific domains in languages other than English, such as the process industry in the German language. This paper introduces an efficient approach called ICL-augmented pretraining or ICL-APT that leverages in-context learning (ICL) and k-nearest neighbors (kNN) to augment target data with domain-related and in-domain texts, significantly reducing GPU time while maintaining strong model performance. Our results show that the best configuration of ICL-APT performed better than the state-of-the-art DAPT by 28.7% (7.87 points) and requires almost 4 times less GPU-computing time, providing a cost-effective solution for industries with limited computational capacity. The findings highlight the broader applicability of this framework to other low-resource industries, making NLP-based solutions more accessible and feasible in production environments.
2025-04-28T14:49:00Z
accepted to TSD 2025
Anastasia Zhukova
Christian E. Matt
Bela Gipp
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19867v1
semi-PD: Towards Efficient LLM Serving via Phase-Wise Disaggregated Computation and Unified Storage
2025-04-28T15:00:03Z
Existing large language model (LLM) serving systems fall into two categories: 1) a unified system where prefill phase and decode phase are co-located on the same GPU, sharing the unified computational resource and storage, and 2) a disaggregated system where the two phases are disaggregated to different GPUs. The design of the disaggregated system addresses the latency interference and sophisticated scheduling issues in the unified system but leads to storage challenges including 1) replicated weights for both phases that prevent flexible deployment, 2) KV cache transfer overhead between the two phases, 3) storage imbalance that causes substantial wasted space of the GPU capacity, and 4) suboptimal resource adjustment arising from the difficulties in migrating KV cache. Such storage inefficiency delivers poor serving performance under high request rates.
In this paper, we identify that the advantage of the disaggregated system lies in the disaggregated computation, i.e., partitioning the computational resource to enable the asynchronous computation of two phases. Thus, we propose a novel LLM serving system, semi-PD, characterized by disaggregated computation and unified storage. In semi-PD, we introduce a computation resource controller to achieve disaggregated computation at the streaming multi-processor (SM) level, and a unified memory manager to manage the asynchronous memory access from both phases. semi-PD has a low-overhead resource adjustment mechanism between the two phases, and a service-level objective (SLO) aware dynamic partitioning algorithm to optimize the SLO attainment. Compared to state-of-the-art systems, semi-PD maintains lower latency at higher request rates, reducing the average end-to-end latency per request by 1.27-2.58x on DeepSeek series models, and serves 1.55-1.72x more requests adhering to latency constraints on Llama series models.
2025-04-28T15:00:03Z
18 pages, 16 figures
Ke Hong
Lufang Chen
Zhong Wang
Xiuhong Li
Qiuli Mao
Jianping Ma
Chao Xiong
Guanyu Wu
Buhe Han
Guohao Dai
Yun Liang
Yu Wang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19874v1
TurboQuant: Online Vector Quantization with Near-optimal Distortion Rate
2025-04-28T15:05:35Z
Vector quantization, a problem rooted in Shannon's source coding theory, aims to quantize high-dimensional Euclidean vectors while minimizing distortion in their geometric structure. We propose TurboQuant to address both mean-squared error (MSE) and inner product distortion, overcoming limitations of existing methods that fail to achieve optimal distortion rates. Our data-oblivious algorithms, suitable for online applications, achieve near-optimal distortion rates (within a small constant factor) across all bit-widths and dimensions. TurboQuant achieves this by randomly rotating input vectors, inducing a concentrated Beta distribution on coordinates, and leveraging the near-independence property of distinct coordinates in high dimensions to simply apply optimal scalar quantizers per each coordinate. Recognizing that MSE-optimal quantizers introduce bias in inner product estimation, we propose a two-stage approach: applying an MSE quantizer followed by a 1-bit Quantized JL (QJL) transform on the residual, resulting in an unbiased inner product quantizer. We also provide a formal proof of the information-theoretic lower bounds on best achievable distortion rate by any vector quantizer, demonstrating that TurboQuant closely matches these bounds, differing only by a small constant ($\approx 2.7$) factor. Experimental results validate our theoretical findings, showing that for KV cache quantization, we achieve absolute quality neutrality with 3.5 bits per channel and marginal quality degradation with 2.5 bits per channel. Furthermore, in nearest neighbor search tasks, our method outperforms existing product quantization techniques in recall while reducing indexing time to virtually zero.
2025-04-28T15:05:35Z
25 pages
Amir Zandieh
Majid Daliri
Majid Hadian
Vahab Mirrokni
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20127v3
Learning Hierarchical Interaction for Accurate Molecular Property Prediction
2025-05-12T00:56:02Z
Discovering molecules with desirable molecular properties, including ADMET profiles, is of great importance in drug discovery. Existing approaches typically employ deep learning models, such as Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) and Transformers, to predict these molecular properties by learning from diverse chemical information. However, these models often fail to efficiently capture and utilize the hierarchical nature of molecular structures, and often lack mechanisms for effective interaction among multi-level features. To address these limitations, we propose a Hierarchical Interaction Message Passing Mechanism, which serves as the foundation of our novel model, the Hierarchical Interaction Message Net (HimNet). Our method enables interaction-aware representation learning across atomic, motif, and molecular levels via hierarchical attention-guided message passing. This design allows HimNet to effectively balance global and local information, ensuring rich and task-relevant feature extraction for downstream property prediction tasks, such as Blood-Brain Barrier Permeability (BBBP). We systematically evaluate HimNet on eleven datasets, including eight widely-used MoleculeNet benchmarks and three challenging, high-value datasets for metabolic stability, malaria activity, and liver microsomal clearance, covering a broad range of pharmacologically relevant properties. Extensive experiments demonstrate that HimNet achieves the best or near-best performance in most molecular property prediction tasks. Furthermore, our method exhibits promising hierarchical interpretability, aligning well with chemical intuition on representative molecules. We believe that HimNet offers an accurate and efficient solution for molecular activity and ADMET property prediction, contributing to advanced decision-making in the early stages of drug discovery.
2025-04-28T15:19:28Z
Huiyang Hong
Xinkai Wu
Hongyu Sun
Chaoyang Xie
Qi Wang
Yuquan Li
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19898v1
GenCLS++: Pushing the Boundaries of Generative Classification in LLMs Through Comprehensive SFT and RL Studies Across Diverse Datasets
2025-04-28T15:30:58Z
As a fundamental task in machine learning, text classification plays a crucial role in many areas. With the rapid scaling of Large Language Models (LLMs), particularly through reinforcement learning (RL), there is a growing need for more capable discriminators. Consequently, advances in classification are becoming increasingly vital for enhancing the overall capabilities of LLMs. Traditional discriminative methods map text to labels but overlook LLMs' intrinsic generative strengths. Generative classification addresses this by prompting the model to directly output labels. However, existing studies still rely on simple SFT alone, seldom probing the interplay between training and inference prompts, and no work has systematically leveraged RL for generative text classifiers and unified SFT, RL, and inference-time prompting in one framework. We bridge this gap with GenCLS++, a framework that jointly optimizes SFT and RL while systematically exploring five high-level strategy dimensions-in-context learning variants, category definitions, explicit uncertainty labels, semantically irrelevant numeric labels, and perplexity-based decoding-during both training and inference. After an SFT "policy warm-up," we apply RL with a simple rule-based reward, yielding sizable extra gains. Across seven datasets, GenCLS++ achieves an average accuracy improvement of 3.46% relative to the naive SFT baseline; on public datasets, this improvement rises to 4.00%. Notably, unlike reasoning-intensive tasks that benefit from explicit thinking processes, we find that classification tasks perform better without such reasoning steps. These insights into the role of explicit reasoning provide valuable guidance for future LLM applications.
2025-04-28T15:30:58Z
Mingqian He
Fei Zhao
Chonggang Lu
Ziyan Liu
Yue Wang
Haofu Qian
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19901v1
Attention Mechanism, Max-Affine Partition, and Universal Approximation
2025-04-28T15:31:45Z
We establish the universal approximation capability of single-layer, single-head self- and cross-attention mechanisms with minimal attached structures. Our key insight is to interpret single-head attention as an input domain-partition mechanism that assigns distinct values to subregions. This allows us to engineer the attention weights such that this assignment imitates the target function. Building on this, we prove that a single self-attention layer, preceded by sum-of-linear transformations, is capable of approximating any continuous function on a compact domain under the $L_\infty$-norm. Furthermore, we extend this construction to approximate any Lebesgue integrable function under $L_p$-norm for $1\leq p <\infty$. Lastly, we also extend our techniques and show that, for the first time, single-head cross-attention achieves the same universal approximation guarantees.
2025-04-28T15:31:45Z
Hude Liu
Jerry Yao-Chieh Hu
Zhao Song
Han Liu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19925v2
SYMI: Efficient Mixture-of-Experts Training via Model and Optimizer State Decoupling
2025-10-17T01:36:11Z
Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) models have become a widely-adopted solution to continue scaling model sizes without a corresponding linear increase in compute. During MoE model training, each input token is dynamically routed to a subset of experts -- sparsely-activated feed-forward networks -- within each transformer layer. The distribution of tokens assigned to each expert varies widely and rapidly over the course of training. To handle the wide load imbalance across experts, current systems are forced to either drop tokens assigned to popular experts, degrading convergence, or frequently rebalance resources allocated to each expert based on popularity, incurring high state migration overheads.
To break this performance-accuracy tradeoff, we introduce SYMI, an adaptive MoE training system. The key insight of SYMI is to decouple the placement of expert parameters from their large optimizer state. SYMI statically partitions the optimizer of each expert across all training nodes. Meanwhile, SYMI dynamically adjusts the placement of expert parameters by repurposing existing weight updates, avoiding migration overheads. In doing so, SYMI right-sizes the GPU resources allocated to each expert, on a per-iteration basis, with minimal overhead. Compared to state-of-the-art MoE training systems, DeepSpeed and FlexMoE, SYMI is able to achieve a 30.5% and 25.9% faster time-to-convergence, respectively.
2025-04-28T15:58:55Z
Athinagoras Skiadopoulos
Mark Zhao
Swapnil Gandhi
Thomas Norrie
Shrijeet Mukherjee
Christos Kozyrakis
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19933v1
Automated decision-making for dynamic task assignment at scale
2025-04-28T16:08:35Z
The Dynamic Task Assignment Problem (DTAP) concerns matching resources to tasks in real time while minimizing some objectives, like resource costs or task cycle time. In this work, we consider a DTAP variant where every task is a case composed of a stochastic sequence of activities. The DTAP, in this case, involves the decision of which employee to assign to which activity to process requests as quickly as possible. In recent years, Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) has emerged as a promising tool for tackling this DTAP variant, but most research is limited to solving small-scale, synthetic problems, neglecting the challenges posed by real-world use cases. To bridge this gap, this work proposes a DRL-based Decision Support System (DSS) for real-world scale DTAPS. To this end, we introduce a DRL agent with two novel elements: a graph structure for observations and actions that can effectively represent any DTAP and a reward function that is provably equivalent to the objective of minimizing the average cycle time of tasks. The combination of these two novelties allows the agent to learn effective and generalizable assignment policies for real-world scale DTAPs. The proposed DSS is evaluated on five DTAP instances whose parameters are extracted from real-world logs through process mining. The experimental evaluation shows how the proposed DRL agent matches or outperforms the best baseline in all DTAP instances and generalizes on different time horizons and across instances.
2025-04-28T16:08:35Z
Riccardo Lo Bianco
Willem van Jaarsveld
Jeroen Middelhuis
Luca Begnardi
Remco Dijkman
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19981v3
Accurate and Diverse LLM Mathematical Reasoning via Automated PRM-Guided GFlowNets
2025-10-13T10:39:21Z
Achieving both accuracy and diverse reasoning remains challenging for Large Language Models (LLMs) in complex domains like mathematics. A key bottleneck is evaluating intermediate reasoning steps to guide generation without costly human annotations. To address this, we first introduce a novel Process Reward Model (PRM) trained automatically using Monte Carlo Tree Search coupled with a similarity-based data augmentation technique, effectively capturing step-level reasoning quality. Leveraging this PRM, we then adapt Generative Flow Networks (GFlowNets) to operate at the reasoning step level. Unlike traditional reinforcement learning focused on maximizing a single reward, GFlowNets naturally sample diverse, high-quality solutions proportional to their rewards, as measured by our PRM. Empirical evaluation shows strong improvements in both accuracy and solution diversity on challenging mathematical benchmarks (e.g., +2.59% absolute accuracy on MATH Level 5 for Llama3.2-3B), with effective generalization to unseen datasets (+9.4\% absolute on SAT MATH). Furthermore, we benchmark our PRM against existing open-source reward models, demonstrating superior alignment with reasoning quality and more consistent guidance for downstream generation. Our work demonstrates the potential of PRM-guided, step-level GFlowNets for developing more robust and versatile mathematical reasoning in LLMs.
2025-04-28T16:56:41Z
Adam Younsi
Ahmed Attia
Abdalgader Abubaker
Mohamed El Amine Seddik
Hakim Hacid
Salem Lahlou
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.19982v2
TD-EVAL: Revisiting Task-Oriented Dialogue Evaluation by Combining Turn-Level Precision with Dialogue-Level Comparisons
2025-07-16T17:52:44Z
Task-oriented dialogue (TOD) systems are experiencing a revolution driven by Large Language Models (LLMs), yet the evaluation methodologies for these systems remain insufficient for their growing sophistication. While traditional automatic metrics effectively assessed earlier modular systems, they focus solely on the dialogue level and cannot detect critical intermediate errors that can arise during user-agent interactions. In this paper, we introduce TD-EVAL (Turn and Dialogue-level Evaluation), a two-step evaluation framework that unifies fine-grained turn-level analysis with holistic dialogue-level comparisons. At turn level, we evaluate each response along three TOD-specific dimensions: conversation cohesion, backend knowledge consistency, and policy compliance. Meanwhile, we design TOD Agent Arena that uses pairwise comparisons to provide a measure of dialogue-level quality. Through experiments on MultiWOZ 2.4 and τ-Bench, we demonstrate that TD-EVAL effectively identifies the conversational errors that conventional metrics miss. Furthermore, TD-EVAL exhibits better alignment with human judgments than traditional and LLM-based metrics. These findings demonstrate that TD-EVAL introduces a new paradigm for TOD system evaluation, efficiently assessing both turn and system levels with a plug-and-play framework for future research.
2025-04-28T16:57:17Z
Emre Can Acikgoz
Carl Guo
Suvodip Dey
Akul Datta
Takyoung Kim
Gokhan Tur
Dilek Hakkani-Tür
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20000v1
Knowledge Distillation of Domain-adapted LLMs for Question-Answering in Telecom
2025-04-28T17:19:25Z
Knowledge Distillation (KD) is one of the approaches to reduce the size of Large Language Models (LLMs). A LLM with smaller number of model parameters (student) is trained to mimic the performance of a LLM of a larger size (teacher model) on a specific task. For domain-specific tasks, it is not clear if teacher or student model, or both, must be considered for domain adaptation. In this work, we study this problem from perspective of telecom domain Question-Answering (QA) task. We systematically experiment with Supervised Fine-tuning (SFT) of teacher only, SFT of student only and SFT of both prior to KD. We design experiments to study the impact of vocabulary (same and different) and KD algorithms (vanilla KD and Dual Space KD, DSKD) on the distilled model. Multi-faceted evaluation of the distillation using 14 different metrics (N-gram, embedding and LLM-based metrics) is considered. Experimental results show that SFT of teacher improves performance of distilled model when both models have same vocabulary, irrespective of algorithm and metrics. Overall, SFT of both teacher and student results in better performance across all metrics, although the statistical significance of the same depends on the vocabulary of the teacher models.
2025-04-28T17:19:25Z
10 pages, 4 figures, 3 tables
Rishika Sen
Sujoy Roychowdhury
Sumit Soman
H. G. Ranjani
Srikhetra Mohanty
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20004v1
Socially-Aware Autonomous Driving: Inferring Yielding Intentions for Safer Interactions
2025-04-28T17:24:04Z
Since the emergence of autonomous driving technology, it has advanced rapidly over the past decade. It is becoming increasingly likely that autonomous vehicles (AVs) would soon coexist with human-driven vehicles (HVs) on the roads. Currently, safety and reliable decision-making remain significant challenges, particularly when AVs are navigating lane changes and interacting with surrounding HVs. Therefore, precise estimation of the intentions of surrounding HVs can assist AVs in making more reliable and safe lane change decision-making. This involves not only understanding their current behaviors but also predicting their future motions without any direct communication. However, distinguishing between the passing and yielding intentions of surrounding HVs still remains ambiguous. To address the challenge, we propose a social intention estimation algorithm rooted in Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG), coupled with a decision-making framework employing Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) algorithms. To evaluate the method's performance, the proposed framework can be tested and applied in a lane-changing scenario within a simulated environment. Furthermore, the experiment results demonstrate how our approach enhances the ability of AVs to navigate lane changes safely and efficiently on roads.
2025-04-28T17:24:04Z
Jing Wang
Yan Jin
Hamid Taghavifar
Fei Ding
Chongfeng Wei
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20013v2
LLM-Generated Fake News Induces Truth Decay in News Ecosystem: A Case Study on Neural News Recommendation
2025-04-29T13:41:59Z
Online fake news moderation now faces a new challenge brought by the malicious use of large language models (LLMs) in fake news production. Though existing works have shown LLM-generated fake news is hard to detect from an individual aspect, it remains underexplored how its large-scale release will impact the news ecosystem. In this study, we develop a simulation pipeline and a dataset with ~56k generated news of diverse types to investigate the effects of LLM-generated fake news within neural news recommendation systems. Our findings expose a truth decay phenomenon, where real news is gradually losing its advantageous position in news ranking against fake news as LLM-generated news is involved in news recommendation. We further provide an explanation about why truth decay occurs from a familiarity perspective and show the positive correlation between perplexity and news ranking. Finally, we discuss the threats of LLM-generated fake news and provide possible countermeasures. We urge stakeholders to address this emerging challenge to preserve the integrity of news ecosystems.
2025-04-28T17:32:38Z
ACM SIGIR 2025 Full Paper
Beizhe Hu
Qiang Sheng
Juan Cao
Yang Li
Danding Wang
10.1145/3726302.3730027
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20020v2
Modular Machine Learning: An Indispensable Path towards New-Generation Large Language Models
2025-09-18T16:34:54Z
Large language models (LLMs) have substantially advanced machine learning research, including natural language processing, computer vision, data mining, etc., yet they still exhibit critical limitations in explainability, reliability, adaptability, and extensibility. In this paper, we overview a promising learning paradigm, i.e., Modular Machine Learning (MML), as an essential approach toward new-generation LLMs capable of addressing these issues. We begin by systematically and comprehensively surveying the existing literature on modular machine learning, with a particular focus on modular data representation and modular models. Then, we propose a unified MML framework for LLMs, which decomposes the complex structure of LLMs into three interdependent components: modular representation, modular model, and modular reasoning. Specifically, the MML paradigm discussed in this article is able to: i) clarify the internal working mechanism of LLMs through the disentanglement of semantic components; ii) allow for flexible and task-adaptive model design; iii) enable an interpretable and logic-driven decision-making process. We further elaborate a feasible implementation of MML-based LLMs via leveraging advanced techniques such as disentangled representation learning, neural architecture search and neuro-symbolic learning. Last but not least, we critically identify the remaining key challenges, such as the integration of continuous neural and discrete symbolic processes, joint optimization, and computational scalability, present promising future research directions that deserve further exploration. Ultimately, we believe the integration of the MML with LLMs has the potential to bridge the gap between statistical (deep) learning and formal (logical) reasoning, thereby paving the way for robust, adaptable, and trustworthy AI systems across a wide range of real-world applications.
2025-04-28T17:42:02Z
20 pages, 4 figures, 4 tables
Xin Wang
Haoyang Li
Haibo Chen
Zeyang Zhang
Wenwu Zhu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20022v2
Better To Ask in English? Evaluating Factual Accuracy of Multilingual LLMs in English and Low-Resource Languages
2025-09-14T15:49:59Z
Multilingual Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant effectiveness across various languages, particularly in high-resource languages such as English. However, their performance in terms of factual accuracy across other low-resource languages, especially Indic languages, remains an area of investigation. In this study, we assess the factual accuracy of LLMs - GPT-4o, Gemma-2-9B, Gemma-2-2B, and Llama-3.1-8B - by comparing their performance in English and Indic languages using the IndicQuest dataset, which contains question-answer pairs in English and 19 Indic languages. By asking the same questions in English and their respective Indic translations, we analyze whether the models are more reliable for regional context questions in Indic languages or when operating in English. Our findings reveal that LLMs often perform better in English, even for questions rooted in Indic contexts. Notably, we observe a higher tendency for hallucination in responses generated in low-resource Indic languages, highlighting challenges in the multilingual understanding capabilities of current LLMs.
2025-04-28T17:48:13Z
Pritika Rohera
Chaitrali Ginimav
Gayatri Sawant
Raviraj Joshi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20131v4
LZ Penalty: An information-theoretic repetition penalty for autoregressive language models
2026-08-18T06:30:57Z
We introduce the LZ penalty, a penalty specialized for reducing degenerate repetitions in autoregressive language models without loss of capability. The penalty is based on the codelengths in the LZ77 universal lossless compression algorithm. Through the lens of the prediction-compression duality, decoding the LZ penalty has the interpretation of sampling from the residual distribution after removing the information that is highly compressible. We demonstrate the LZ penalty enables state-of-the-art open-source reasoning models to operate with greedy (temperature zero) decoding without loss of capability and without instances of degenerate repetition. Both the industry-standard frequency penalty and repetition penalty are ineffective, incurring degenerate repetition rates of up to 4%.
2025-04-28T17:58:28Z
Post-publication corrections (minor calculation mistakes)
Antonio A. Ginart
Naveen Kodali
Jason Lee
Caiming Xiong
Silvio Savarese
John R. Emmons
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20039v4
AutoJudge: Judge Decoding Without Manual Annotation
2025-11-20T14:38:33Z
We introduce AutoJudge, a method that accelerates large language model (LLM) inference with task-specific lossy speculative decoding. Instead of matching the original model output distribution token-by-token, we identify which of the generated tokens affect the downstream quality of the response, relaxing the distribution match guarantee so that the "unimportant" tokens can be generated faster. Our approach relies on a semi-greedy search algorithm to test which of the mismatches between target and draft models should be corrected to preserve quality and which ones may be skipped. We then train a lightweight classifier based on existing LLM embeddings to predict, at inference time, which mismatching tokens can be safely accepted without compromising the final answer quality. We evaluate the effectiveness of AutoJudge with multiple draft/target model pairs on mathematical reasoning and programming benchmarks, achieving significant speedups at the cost of a minor accuracy reduction. Notably, on GSM8k with the Llama 3.1 70B target model, our approach achieves up to $\approx2\times$ speedup over speculative decoding at the cost of $\le 1\%$ drop in accuracy. When applied to the LiveCodeBench benchmark, AutoJudge automatically detects programming-specific important tokens, accepting $\ge 25$ tokens per speculation cycle at $2\%$ drop in Pass@1. Our approach requires no human annotation and is easy to integrate with modern LLM inference frameworks.
2025-04-28T17:59:28Z
Accepted at NeurIPS 2025
Roman Garipov
Fedor Velikonivtsev
Ivan Ermakov
Ruslan Svirschevski
Vage Egiazarian
Max Ryabinin
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20157v2
Toward Evaluative Thinking: Meta Policy Optimization with Evolving Reward Models
2025-05-16T22:22:27Z
Reward-based alignment methods for large language models (LLMs) face two key limitations: vulnerability to reward hacking, where models exploit flaws in the reward signal; and reliance on brittle, labor-intensive prompt engineering when LLMs are used as reward models. We introduce Meta Policy Optimization (MPO), a framework that addresses these challenges by integrating a meta-reward model that dynamically refines the reward model's prompt throughout training. In MPO, the meta-reward model monitors the evolving training context and continuously adjusts the reward model's prompt to maintain high alignment, providing an adaptive reward signal that resists exploitation by the policy. This meta-learning approach promotes a more stable policy optimization, and greatly reduces the need for manual reward prompt design. It yields performance on par with or better than models guided by extensively hand-crafted reward prompts. Furthermore, we show that MPO maintains its effectiveness across diverse tasks, from essay writing to mathematical reasoning, without requiring specialized reward designs. Beyond standard RLAIF, MPO's meta-learning formulation is readily extensible to higher-level alignment frameworks. Overall, this method addresses theoretical and practical challenges in reward-based RL alignment for LLMs, paving the way for more robust and adaptable alignment strategies. The code and data can be accessed at: https://github.com/minnesotanlp/mpo
2025-04-28T18:02:35Z
Code and data: https://github.com/minnesotanlp/mpo
Zae Myung Kim
Chanwoo Park
Vipul Raheja
Suin Kim
Dongyeop Kang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20168v1
MICE for CATs: Model-Internal Confidence Estimation for Calibrating Agents with Tools
2025-04-28T18:06:38Z
Tool-using agents that act in the world need to be both useful and safe. Well-calibrated model confidences can be used to weigh the risk versus reward of potential actions, but prior work shows that many models are poorly calibrated. Inspired by interpretability literature exploring the internals of models, we propose a novel class of model-internal confidence estimators (MICE) to better assess confidence when calling tools. MICE first decodes from each intermediate layer of the language model using logitLens and then computes similarity scores between each layer's generation and the final output. These features are fed into a learned probabilistic classifier to assess confidence in the decoded output. On the simulated trial and error (STE) tool-calling dataset using Llama3 models, we find that MICE beats or matches the baselines on smoothed expected calibration error. Using MICE confidences to determine whether to call a tool significantly improves over strong baselines on a new metric, expected tool-calling utility. Further experiments show that MICE is sample-efficient, can generalize zero-shot to unseen APIs, and results in higher tool-calling utility in scenarios with varying risk levels. Our code is open source, available at https://github.com/microsoft/mice_for_cats.
2025-04-28T18:06:38Z
Accepted at NAACL 2025. Code: https://github.com/microsoft/mice_for_cats
Nishant Subramani
Jason Eisner
Justin Svegliato
Benjamin Van Durme
Yu Su
Sam Thomson
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20178v1
A Transformer-based Multimodal Fusion Model for Efficient Crowd Counting Using Visual and Wireless Signals
2025-04-28T18:26:28Z
Current crowd-counting models often rely on single-modal inputs, such as visual images or wireless signal data, which can result in significant information loss and suboptimal recognition performance. To address these shortcomings, we propose TransFusion, a novel multimodal fusion-based crowd-counting model that integrates Channel State Information (CSI) with image data. By leveraging the powerful capabilities of Transformer networks, TransFusion effectively combines these two distinct data modalities, enabling the capture of comprehensive global contextual information that is critical for accurate crowd estimation. However, while transformers are well capable of capturing global features, they potentially fail to identify finer-grained, local details essential for precise crowd counting. To mitigate this, we incorporate Convolutional Neural Networks (CNNs) into the model architecture, enhancing its ability to extract detailed local features that complement the global context provided by the Transformer. Extensive experimental evaluations demonstrate that TransFusion achieves high accuracy with minimal counting errors while maintaining superior efficiency.
2025-04-28T18:26:28Z
This paper was accepted at IEEE WCNC 2025
Zhe Cui
Yuli Li
Le-Nam Tran
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20187v1
AI Recommendation Systems for Lane-Changing Using Adherence-Aware Reinforcement Learning
2025-04-28T18:38:39Z
In this paper, we present an adherence-aware reinforcement learning (RL) approach aimed at seeking optimal lane-changing recommendations within a semi-autonomous driving environment to enhance a single vehicle's travel efficiency. The problem is framed within a Markov decision process setting and is addressed through an adherence-aware deep Q network, which takes into account the partial compliance of human drivers with the recommended actions. This approach is evaluated within CARLA's driving environment under realistic scenarios.
2025-04-28T18:38:39Z
6 pages, 5 figures, conference
Weihao Sun
Heeseung Bang
Andreas A. Malikopoulos
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20197v1
Representation Learning on a Random Lattice
2025-04-28T19:01:36Z
Decomposing a deep neural network's learned representations into interpretable features could greatly enhance its safety and reliability. To better understand features, we adopt a geometric perspective, viewing them as a learned coordinate system for mapping an embedded data distribution. We motivate a model of a generic data distribution as a random lattice and analyze its properties using percolation theory. Learned features are categorized into context, component, and surface features. The model is qualitatively consistent with recent findings in mechanistic interpretability and suggests directions for future research.
2025-04-28T19:01:36Z
Published in Proceedings of ILIAD (2024), https://www.iliadconference.com/proceedings
Aryeh Brill
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20199v1
Weaving Context Across Images: Improving Vision-Language Models through Focus-Centric Visual Chains
2025-04-28T19:02:18Z
Vision-language models (VLMs) achieve remarkable success in single-image tasks. However, real-world scenarios often involve intricate multi-image inputs, leading to a notable performance decline as models struggle to disentangle critical information scattered across complex visual features. In this work, we propose Focus-Centric Visual Chain, a novel paradigm that enhances VLMs'perception, comprehension, and reasoning abilities in multi-image scenarios. To facilitate this paradigm, we propose Focus-Centric Data Synthesis, a scalable bottom-up approach for synthesizing high-quality data with elaborate reasoning paths. Through this approach, We construct VISC-150K, a large-scale dataset with reasoning data in the form of Focus-Centric Visual Chain, specifically designed for multi-image tasks. Experimental results on seven multi-image benchmarks demonstrate that our method achieves average performance gains of 3.16% and 2.24% across two distinct model architectures, without compromising the general vision-language capabilities. our study represents a significant step toward more robust and capable vision-language systems that can handle complex visual scenarios.
2025-04-28T19:02:18Z
Juntian Zhang
Chuanqi cheng
Yuhan Liu
Wei Liu
Jian Luan
Rui Yan
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20213v1
Can Large Language Models Learn Formal Logic? A Data-Driven Training and Evaluation Framework
2025-04-28T19:25:29Z
This paper investigates the logical reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs). For a precisely defined yet tractable formulation, we choose the conceptually simple but technically complex task of constructing proofs in Boolean logic. A trained LLM receives as input a set of assumptions and a goal, and produces as output a proof that formally derives the goal from the assumptions. Incorrect proofs are caught by an automated proof checker. A critical obstacle for training is the scarcity of real-world proofs. We propose an efficient, randomized procedure for synthesizing valid proofs and introduce Template Transformation, a data augmentation technique that enhances the model's ability to handle complex logical expressions. The central evaluation question is whether an LLM has indeed learned to reason. We propose tests to measure the reasoning ability of a black-box LLM. By these measures, experiments demonstrate strong reasoning capabilities for assertions with short proofs, which decline with proof complexity. Notably, template transformation improves accuracy even for smaller models, suggesting its effectiveness across model scales.
2025-04-28T19:25:29Z
Yuan Xia
Akanksha Atrey
Fadoua Khmaissia
Kedar S. Namjoshi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20220v1
A Multimodal Pipeline for Clinical Data Extraction: Applying Vision-Language Models to Scans of Transfusion Reaction Reports
2025-04-28T19:40:28Z
Despite the growing adoption of electronic health records, many processes still rely on paper documents, reflecting the heterogeneous real-world conditions in which healthcare is delivered. The manual transcription process is time-consuming and prone to errors when transferring paper-based data to digital formats. To streamline this workflow, this study presents an open-source pipeline that extracts and categorizes checkbox data from scanned documents. Demonstrated on transfusion reaction reports, the design supports adaptation to other checkbox-rich document types. The proposed method integrates checkbox detection, multilingual optical character recognition (OCR) and multilingual vision-language models (VLMs). The pipeline achieves high precision and recall compared against annually compiled gold-standards from 2017 to 2024. The result is a reduction in administrative workload and accurate regulatory reporting. The open-source availability of this pipeline encourages self-hosted parsing of checkbox forms.
2025-04-28T19:40:28Z
Henning Schäfer
Cynthia S. Schmidt
Johannes Wutzkowsky
Kamil Lorek
Lea Reinartz
Johannes Rückert
Christian Temme
Britta Böckmann
Peter A. Horn
Christoph M. Friedrich
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20271v1
Investigating task-specific prompts and sparse autoencoders for activation monitoring
2025-04-28T21:28:17Z
Language models can behave in unexpected and unsafe ways, and so it is valuable to monitor their outputs. Internal activations of language models encode additional information that could be useful for this. The baseline approach for activation monitoring is some variation of linear probing on a particular layer: starting from a labeled dataset, train a logistic regression classifier on that layer's activations. Recent work has proposed several approaches which may improve on naive linear probing, by leveraging additional computation. One class of techniques, which we call "prompted probing," leverages test time computation to improve monitoring by (1) prompting the model with a description of the monitoring task, and (2) applying a learned linear probe to resulting activations. Another class of techniques uses computation at train time: training sparse autoencoders offline to identify an interpretable basis for the activations, and e.g. max-pooling activations across tokens using that basis before applying a linear probe. However, one can also prompt the model with a description of the monitoring task and use its output directly. We develop and test novel refinements of these methods and compare them against each other. We find asking the model zero-shot is a reasonable baseline when inference-time compute is not limited; however, activation probing methods can substantially outperform this baseline given sufficient training data. Specifically, we recommend prompted probing when inference-time compute is available, due to its superior data efficiency and good generalization performance. Alternatively, if inference-time compute is limited, we find SAE-based probing methods outperform raw activation probing.
2025-04-28T21:28:17Z
18 pages, 13 figures
Henk Tillman
Dan Mossing
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20276v1
Enhancing Systematic Reviews with Large Language Models: Using GPT-4 and Kimi
2025-04-28T21:44:08Z
This research delved into GPT-4 and Kimi, two Large Language Models (LLMs), for systematic reviews. We evaluated their performance by comparing LLM-generated codes with human-generated codes from a peer-reviewed systematic review on assessment. Our findings suggested that the performance of LLMs fluctuates by data volume and question complexity for systematic reviews.
2025-04-28T21:44:08Z
13 pages, Paper presented at the National Council on Measurement in Education (NCME) Conference, Denver, Colorado, in April 2025
Dandan Chen Kaptur
Yue Huang
Xuejun Ryan Ji
Yanhui Guo
Bradley Kaptur
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21047v1
Model Connectomes: A Generational Approach to Data-Efficient Language Models
2025-04-29T00:17:53Z
Biological neural networks are shaped both by evolution across generations and by individual learning within an organism's lifetime, whereas standard artificial neural networks undergo a single, large training procedure without inherited constraints. In this preliminary work, we propose a framework that incorporates this crucial generational dimension - an "outer loop" of evolution that shapes the "inner loop" of learning - so that artificial networks better mirror the effects of evolution and individual learning in biological organisms. Focusing on language, we train a model that inherits a "model connectome" from the outer evolution loop before exposing it to a developmental-scale corpus of 100M tokens. Compared with two closely matched control models, we show that the connectome model performs better or on par on natural language processing tasks as well as alignment to human behavior and brain data. These findings suggest that a model connectome serves as an efficient prior for learning in low-data regimes - narrowing the gap between single-generation artificial models and biologically evolved neural networks.
2025-04-29T00:17:53Z
Klemen Kotar
Greta Tuckute
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21048v1
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning for Resources Allocation Optimization: A Survey
2025-04-29T00:18:31Z
Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning (MARL) has become a powerful framework for numerous real-world applications, modeling distributed decision-making and learning from interactions with complex environments. Resource Allocation Optimization (RAO) benefits significantly from MARL's ability to tackle dynamic and decentralized contexts. MARL-based approaches are increasingly applied to RAO challenges across sectors playing pivotal roles to Industry 4.0 developments. This survey provides a comprehensive review of recent MARL algorithms for RAO, encompassing core concepts, classifications, and a structured taxonomy. By outlining the current research landscape and identifying primary challenges and future directions, this survey aims to support researchers and practitioners in leveraging MARL's potential to advance resource allocation solutions.
2025-04-29T00:18:31Z
Mohamad A. Hady
Siyi Hu
Mahardhika Pratama
Jimmy Cao
Ryszard Kowalczyk
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20355v1
Local Prompt Optimization
2025-04-29T01:45:47Z
In recent years, the use of prompts to guide the output of Large Language Models have increased dramatically. However, even the best of experts struggle to choose the correct words to stitch up a prompt for the desired task. To solve this, LLM driven prompt optimization emerged as an important problem. Existing prompt optimization methods optimize a prompt globally, where in all the prompt tokens have to be optimized over a large vocabulary while solving a complex task. The large optimization space (tokens) leads to insufficient guidance for a better prompt. In this work, we introduce Local Prompt Optimization (LPO) that integrates with any general automatic prompt engineering method. We identify the optimization tokens in a prompt and nudge the LLM to focus only on those tokens in its optimization step. We observe remarkable performance improvements on Math Reasoning (GSM8k and MultiArith) and BIG-bench Hard benchmarks across various automatic prompt engineering methods. Further, we show that LPO converges to the optimal prompt faster than global methods.
2025-04-29T01:45:47Z
Accepted as Oral at NAACL 2025 (Main Conference)
Yash Jain
Vishal Chowdhary
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20356v1
What Causes Knowledge Loss in Multilingual Language Models?
2025-04-29T01:49:09Z
Cross-lingual transfer in natural language processing (NLP) models enhances multilingual performance by leveraging shared linguistic knowledge. However, traditional methods that process all data simultaneously often fail to mimic real-world scenarios, leading to challenges like catastrophic forgetting, where fine-tuning on new tasks degrades performance on previously learned ones. Our study explores this issue in multilingual contexts, focusing on linguistic differences affecting representational learning rather than just model parameters. We experiment with 52 languages using LoRA adapters of varying ranks to evaluate non-shared, partially shared, and fully shared parameters. Our aim is to see if parameter sharing through adapters can mitigate forgetting while preserving prior knowledge. We find that languages using non-Latin scripts are more susceptible to catastrophic forgetting, whereas those written in Latin script facilitate more effective cross-lingual transfer.
2025-04-29T01:49:09Z
Maria Khelli
Samuel Cahyawijaya
Ayu Purwarianti
Genta Indra Winata
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20371v3
DMDTEval: An Evaluation and Analysis of LLMs on Disambiguation in Multi-domain Translation
2025-10-11T12:24:39Z
Currently, Large Language Models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable results in machine translation. However, their performance in multi-domain translation (MDT) is less satisfactory, the meanings of words can vary across different domains, highlighting the significant ambiguity inherent in MDT. Therefore, evaluating the disambiguation ability of LLMs in MDT, remains an open problem. To this end, we present an evaluation and analysis of LLMs on disambiguation in multi-domain translation (DMDTEval), our systematic evaluation framework consisting of three critical aspects: (1) we construct a translation test set with multi-domain ambiguous word annotation, (2) we curate a diverse set of disambiguation prompt strategies, and (3) we design precise disambiguation metrics, and study the efficacy of various prompt strategies on multiple state-of-the-art LLMs. We conduct comprehensive experiments across 4 language pairs and 13 domains, our extensive experiments reveal a number of crucial findings that we believe will pave the way and also facilitate further research in the critical area of improving the disambiguation of LLMs.
2025-04-29T02:27:36Z
Accepted by EMNLP2025-main
DMDTEval: An Evaluation and Analysis of LLMs on Disambiguation in Multi-domain Translation (Man et al., EMNLP 2025)
Zhibo Man
Yuanmeng Chen
Yujie Zhang
Jinan Xu
10.18653/v1/2025.emnlp-main.309
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21051v1
Multimodal Large Language Models for Medicine: A Comprehensive Survey
2025-04-29T03:07:38Z
MLLMs have recently become a focal point in the field of artificial intelligence research. Building on the strong capabilities of LLMs, MLLMs are adept at addressing complex multi-modal tasks. With the release of GPT-4, MLLMs have gained substantial attention from different domains. Researchers have begun to explore the potential of MLLMs in the medical and healthcare domain. In this paper, we first introduce the background and fundamental concepts related to LLMs and MLLMs, while emphasizing the working principles of MLLMs. Subsequently, we summarize three main directions of application within healthcare: medical reporting, medical diagnosis, and medical treatment. Our findings are based on a comprehensive review of 330 recent papers in this area. We illustrate the remarkable capabilities of MLLMs in these domains by providing specific examples. For data, we present six mainstream modes of data along with their corresponding evaluation benchmarks. At the end of the survey, we discuss the challenges faced by MLLMs in the medical and healthcare domain and propose feasible methods to mitigate or overcome these issues.
2025-04-29T03:07:38Z
Jiarui Ye
Hao Tang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20395v2
Partial Answer of How Transformers Learn Automata
2025-05-11T02:19:44Z
We introduce a novel framework for simulating finite automata using representation-theoretic semidirect products and Fourier modules, achieving more efficient Transformer-based implementations.
2025-04-29T03:35:40Z
Tiantian Zhang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20405v2
SCOPE-MRI: Bankart Lesion Detection as a Case Study in Data Curation and Deep Learning for Challenging Diagnoses
2025-12-01T18:35:53Z
Deep learning has shown strong performance in musculoskeletal imaging, but prior work has largely targeted conditions where diagnosis is relatively straightforward. More challenging problems remain underexplored, such as detecting Bankart lesions (anterior-inferior glenoid labral tears) on standard MRIs. These lesions are difficult to diagnose due to subtle imaging features, often necessitating invasive MRI arthrograms (MRAs). We introduce ScopeMRI, the first publicly available, expert-annotated dataset for shoulder pathologies, and present a deep learning framework for Bankart lesion detection on both standard MRIs and MRAs. ScopeMRI contains shoulder MRIs from patients who underwent arthroscopy, providing ground-truth labels from intraoperative findings, the diagnostic gold standard. Separate models were trained for MRIs and MRAs using CNN- and transformer-based architectures, with predictions ensembled across multiple imaging planes. Our models achieved radiologist-level performance, with accuracy on standard MRIs surpassing radiologists interpreting MRAs. External validation on independent hospital data demonstrated initial generalizability across imaging protocols. By releasing ScopeMRI and a modular codebase for training and evaluation, we aim to accelerate research in musculoskeletal imaging and foster development of datasets and models that address clinically challenging diagnostic tasks.
2025-04-29T04:02:44Z
This version of the article has been accepted for publication at Nature Partner Journal (NPJ) Artificial Intelligence, but is not the Version of Record and does not reflect post-acceptance improvements or any corrections. The Version of Record is available online at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/s44387-025-00043-5
Sahil Sethi
Sai Reddy
Mansi Sakarvadia
Jordan Serotte
Darlington Nwaudo
Nicholas Maassen
Lewis Shi
10.1038/s44387-025-00043-5
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20430v1
Learning Laplacian Positional Encodings for Heterophilous Graphs
2025-04-29T04:58:13Z
In this work, we theoretically demonstrate that current graph positional encodings (PEs) are not beneficial and could potentially hurt performance in tasks involving heterophilous graphs, where nodes that are close tend to have different labels. This limitation is critical as many real-world networks exhibit heterophily, and even highly homophilous graphs can contain local regions of strong heterophily. To address this limitation, we propose Learnable Laplacian Positional Encodings (LLPE), a new PE that leverages the full spectrum of the graph Laplacian, enabling them to capture graph structure on both homophilous and heterophilous graphs. Theoretically, we prove LLPE's ability to approximate a general class of graph distances and demonstrate its generalization properties. Empirically, our evaluation on 12 benchmarks demonstrates that LLPE improves accuracy across a variety of GNNs, including graph transformers, by up to 35% and 14% on synthetic and real-world graphs, respectively. Going forward, our work represents a significant step towards developing PEs that effectively capture complex structures in heterophilous graphs.
2025-04-29T04:58:13Z
AISTATS 2025; version with full appendix
Michael Ito
Jiong Zhu
Dexiong Chen
Danai Koutra
Jenna Wiens
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20437v1
GaLore 2: Large-Scale LLM Pre-Training by Gradient Low-Rank Projection
2025-04-29T05:27:02Z
Large language models (LLMs) have revolutionized natural language understanding and generation but face significant memory bottlenecks during training. GaLore, Gradient Low-Rank Projection, addresses this issue by leveraging the inherent low-rank structure of weight gradients, enabling substantial memory savings without sacrificing performance. Recent works further extend GaLore from various aspects, including low-bit quantization and higher-order tensor structures. However, there are several remaining challenges for GaLore, such as the computational overhead of SVD for subspace updates and the integration with state-of-the-art training parallelization strategies (e.g., FSDP). In this paper, we present GaLore 2, an efficient and scalable GaLore framework that addresses these challenges and incorporates recent advancements. In addition, we demonstrate the scalability of GaLore 2 by pre-training Llama 7B from scratch using up to 500 billion training tokens, highlighting its potential impact on real LLM pre-training scenarios.
2025-04-29T05:27:02Z
DiJia Su
Andrew Gu
Jane Xu
Yuandong Tian
Jiawei Zhao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20446v2
FT-MoE: Sustainable-learning Mixture of Experts for Fault-Tolerant Computing
2025-12-12T09:50:47Z
Intelligent fault-tolerant (FT) computing has recently demonstrated significant advantages in predicting and diagnosing faults proactively, thereby ensuring reliable service delivery. However, due to the heterogeneity of fault knowledge, dynamic workloads, and limited data support, existing deep learning-based FT algorithms face challenges in fault detection quality and training efficiency. This is primarily because their homogenization of fault knowledge perception difficuties to fully capture diverse and complex fault patterns. To address these challenges, we propose FT-MoE, a sustainable-learning fault-tolerant computing framework based on a dual-path architecture for high-accuracy fault detection and classification. This model employs a mixture-of-experts (MoE) architecture, enabling different parameters to learn distinct fault knowledge. Additionally, we adopt a two-stage learning scheme that combines comprehensive offline training with continual online tuning, allowing the model to adaptively optimize its parameters in response to evolving real-time workloads. To facilitate realistic evaluation, we construct a new fault detection and classification dataset for edge networks, comprising 10,000 intervals with fine-grained resource features, surpassing existing datasets in both scale and granularity. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments on the FT benchmark to verify the effectiveness of FT-MoE. Results demonstrate that our model outperforms state-of-the-art methods.
2025-04-29T05:44:59Z
Wenjing Xiao
Wenhao Song
Miaojiang Chen
Min Chen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21053v1
NeuRel-Attack: Neuron Relearning for Safety Disalignment in Large Language Models
2025-04-29T05:49:35Z
Safety alignment in large language models (LLMs) is achieved through fine-tuning mechanisms that regulate neuron activations to suppress harmful content. In this work, we propose a novel approach to induce disalignment by identifying and modifying the neurons responsible for safety constraints. Our method consists of three key steps: Neuron Activation Analysis, where we examine activation patterns in response to harmful and harmless prompts to detect neurons that are critical for distinguishing between harmful and harmless inputs; Similarity-Based Neuron Identification, which systematically locates the neurons responsible for safe alignment; and Neuron Relearning for Safety Removal, where we fine-tune these selected neurons to restore the model's ability to generate previously restricted responses. Experimental results demonstrate that our method effectively removes safety constraints with minimal fine-tuning, highlighting a critical vulnerability in current alignment techniques. Our findings underscore the need for robust defenses against adversarial fine-tuning attacks on LLMs.
2025-04-29T05:49:35Z
Yi Zhou
Wenpeng Xing
Dezhang Kong
Changting Lin
Meng Han
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21055v1
Modeling and Performance Analysis for Semantic Communications Based on Empirical Results
2025-04-29T06:07:50Z
Due to the black-box characteristics of deep learning based semantic encoders and decoders, finding a tractable method for the performance analysis of semantic communications is a challenging problem. In this paper, we propose an Alpha-Beta-Gamma (ABG) formula to model the relationship between the end-to-end measurement and SNR, which can be applied for both image reconstruction tasks and inference tasks. Specifically, for image reconstruction tasks, the proposed ABG formula can well fit the commonly used DL networks, such as SCUNet, and Vision Transformer, for semantic encoding with the multi scale-structural similarity index measure (MS-SSIM) measurement. Furthermore, we find that the upper bound of the MS-SSIM depends on the number of quantized output bits of semantic encoders, and we also propose a closed-form expression to fit the relationship between the MS-SSIM and quantized output bits. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first theoretical expression between end-to-end performance metrics and SNR for semantic communications. Based on the proposed ABG formula, we investigate an adaptive power control scheme for semantic communications over random fading channels, which can effectively guarantee quality of service (QoS) for semantic communications, and then design the optimal power allocation scheme to maximize the energy efficiency of the semantic communication system. Furthermore, by exploiting the bisection algorithm, we develop the power allocation scheme to maximize the minimum QoS of multiple users for OFDMA downlink semantic communication Extensive simulations verify the effectiveness and superiority of the proposed ABG formula and power allocation schemes.
2025-04-29T06:07:50Z
Shuai Ma
Bin Shen
Chuanhui Zhang
Youlong Wu
Hang Li
Shiyin Li
Guangming Shi
Naofal Al-Dhahir
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20456v1
Reviving Any-Subset Autoregressive Models with Principled Parallel Sampling and Speculative Decoding
2025-04-29T06:33:13Z
In arbitrary-order language models, it is an open question how to sample tokens in parallel from the correct joint distribution. With discrete diffusion models, the more tokens they generate in parallel, the less their predicted distributions adhere to the originally learned data distribution, as they rely on a conditional independence assumption that only works with infinitesimally small timesteps. We find that a different class of models, any-subset autoregressive models (AS-ARMs), holds the solution. As implied by the name, AS-ARMs can generate tokens in any order, and in parallel. Moreover, AS-ARMs support parallelized joint probability density estimation, allowing them to correct their own parallel-generated token distributions, via our Any-Subset Speculative Decoding (ASSD) algorithm. ASSD provably enables generation of tokens from the correct joint distribution, with the number of neural network calls upper bounded by the number of tokens predicted. We empirically verify that ASSD speeds up language generation, without sacrificing quality. Furthermore, we provide a mathematically justified scheme for training AS-ARMs for generation, and show that AS-ARMs achieve state-of-the-art performance among sub-200M parameter models on infilling benchmark tasks, and nearly match the performance of models 50X larger on code generation. Our theoretical and empirical results indicate that the once-forgotten AS-ARMs are a promising direction of language modeling.
2025-04-29T06:33:13Z
Gabe Guo
Stefano Ermon
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20469v1
Fane at SemEval-2025 Task 10: Zero-Shot Entity Framing with Large Language Models
2025-04-29T07:10:53Z
Understanding how news narratives frame entities is crucial for studying media's impact on societal perceptions of events. In this paper, we evaluate the zero-shot capabilities of large language models (LLMs) in classifying framing roles. Through systematic experimentation, we assess the effects of input context, prompting strategies, and task decomposition. Our findings show that a hierarchical approach of first identifying broad roles and then fine-grained roles, outperforms single-step classification. We also demonstrate that optimal input contexts and prompts vary across task levels, highlighting the need for subtask-specific strategies. We achieve a Main Role Accuracy of 89.4% and an Exact Match Ratio of 34.5%, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach. Our findings emphasize the importance of tailored prompt design and input context optimization for improving LLM performance in entity framing.
2025-04-29T07:10:53Z
Accepted to The 19th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (Semeval 2025)
Enfa Fane
Mihai Surdeanu
Eduardo Blanco
Steven R. Corman
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20484v2
Enhancing LLM Language Adaption through Cross-lingual In-Context Pre-training
2025-09-19T04:09:02Z
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit remarkable multilingual capabilities despite English-dominated pre-training, attributed to cross-lingual mechanisms during pre-training. Existing methods for enhancing cross-lingual transfer remain constrained by parallel resources, suffering from limited linguistic and domain coverage. We propose Cross-lingual In-context Pre-training (CrossIC-PT), a simple and scalable approach that enhances cross-lingual transfer by leveraging semantically related bilingual texts via simple next-word prediction. We construct CrossIC-PT samples by interleaving semantic-related bilingual Wikipedia documents into a single context window. To access window size constraints, we implement a systematic segmentation policy to split long bilingual document pairs into chunks while adjusting the sliding window mechanism to preserve contextual coherence. We further extend data availability through a semantic retrieval framework to construct CrossIC-PT samples from web-crawled corpus. Experimental results demonstrate that CrossIC-PT improves multilingual performance on three models (Llama-3.1-8B, Qwen2.5-7B, and Qwen2.5-1.5B) across six target languages, yielding performance gains of 3.79%, 3.99%, and 1.95%, respectively, with additional improvements after data augmentation.
2025-04-29T07:24:25Z
12 pages, 6 figures, EMNLP 2025
Linjuan Wu
Haoran Wei
Huan Lin
Tianhao Li
Baosong Yang
Fei Huang
Weiming Lu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20500v1
UniDetox: Universal Detoxification of Large Language Models via Dataset Distillation
2025-04-29T07:40:00Z
We present UniDetox, a universally applicable method designed to mitigate toxicity across various large language models (LLMs). Previous detoxification methods are typically model-specific, addressing only individual models or model families, and require careful hyperparameter tuning due to the trade-off between detoxification efficacy and language modeling performance. In contrast, UniDetox provides a detoxification technique that can be universally applied to a wide range of LLMs without the need for separate model-specific tuning. Specifically, we propose a novel and efficient dataset distillation technique for detoxification using contrastive decoding. This approach distills detoxifying representations in the form of synthetic text data, enabling universal detoxification of any LLM through fine-tuning with the distilled text. Our experiments demonstrate that the detoxifying text distilled from GPT-2 can effectively detoxify larger models, including OPT, Falcon, and LLaMA-2. Furthermore, UniDetox eliminates the need for separate hyperparameter tuning for each model, as a single hyperparameter configuration can be seamlessly applied across different models. Additionally, analysis of the detoxifying text reveals a reduction in politically biased content, providing insights into the attributes necessary for effective detoxification of LLMs.
2025-04-29T07:40:00Z
Accepted at ICLR 2025 (poster)
Huimin Lu
Masaru Isonuma
Junichiro Mori
Ichiro Sakata
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20522v1
Wavelet-Filtering of Symbolic Music Representations for Folk Tune Segmentation and Classification
2025-04-29T08:02:37Z
The aim of this study is to evaluate a machine-learning method in which symbolic representations of folk songs are segmented and classified into tune families with Haar-wavelet filtering. The method is compared with previously proposed Gestalt-based method. Melodies are represented as discrete symbolic pitch-time signals. We apply the continuous wavelet transform (CWT) with the Haar wavelet at specific scales, obtaining filtered versions of melodies emphasizing their information at particular time-scales. We use the filtered signal for representation and segmentation, using the wavelet coefficients' local maxima to indicate local boundaries and classify segments by means of k-nearest neighbours based on standard vector-metrics (Euclidean, cityblock), and compare the results to a Gestalt-based segmentation method and metrics applied directly to the pitch signal. We found that the wavelet based segmentation and wavelet-filtering of the pitch signal lead to better classification accuracy in cross-validated evaluation when the time-scale and other parameters are optimized.
2025-04-29T08:02:37Z
7 pages, 4 figures, 2 tables, Proceedings of the Third International Workshop on Folk Music Analysis (FMA2013)
Gissel Velarde
Tillman Weyde
David Meredith
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20547v1
Revisiting the MIMIC-IV Benchmark: Experiments Using Language Models for Electronic Health Records
2025-04-29T08:49:38Z
The lack of standardized evaluation benchmarks in the medical domain for text inputs can be a barrier to widely adopting and leveraging the potential of natural language models for health-related downstream tasks. This paper revisited an openly available MIMIC-IV benchmark for electronic health records (EHRs) to address this issue. First, we integrate the MIMIC-IV data within the Hugging Face datasets library to allow an easy share and use of this collection. Second, we investigate the application of templates to convert EHR tabular data to text. Experiments using fine-tuned and zero-shot LLMs on the mortality of patients task show that fine-tuned text-based models are competitive against robust tabular classifiers. In contrast, zero-shot LLMs struggle to leverage EHR representations. This study underlines the potential of text-based approaches in the medical field and highlights areas for further improvement.
2025-04-29T08:49:38Z
Proceedings of the First Workshop on Patient-Oriented Language Processing (CL4Health) @ LREC-COLING 2024, May 2024, Torino, Italy
Jesus Lovon
IRIT-IRIS
Thouria Ben-Haddi
IRIT-IRIS
Jules Di Scala
IRIT-IRIS
Jose G. Moreno
IRIT-IRIS
Lynda Tamine
IRIT-IRIS
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20552v1
BrAIcht, a theatrical agent that speaks like Bertolt Brecht's characters
2025-04-29T08:55:12Z
This project introduces BrAIcht, an AI conversational agent that creates dialogues in the distinctive style of the famous German playwright Bertolt Brecht. BrAIcht is fine-tuned using German LeoLM, a large language model with 7 billion parameters and a modified version of the base Llama2 suitable for German language tasks. For fine-tuning, 29 plays of Bertolt Brecht and 907 of other German plays that are stylistically similar to Bertolt Brecht are used to form a more di-erse dataset. Due to the limited memory capacity, a parameterefficient fine-tuning technique called QLoRA is implemented to train the large language model. The results, based on BLEU score and perplexity, show very promising performance of BrAIcht in generating dialogues in the style of Bertolt Brecht.
2025-04-29T08:55:12Z
Generative Art Conference - GA2024, Generative Art and Design Lab, Argenia Association, Roma, Italy, Dec 2024, Venice, Italy. pp.290-296
Baz Roland
LIASD
Kristina Malyseva
LIASD
Anna Pappa
LIASD
Tristan Cazenave
APA
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20571v3
Reinforcement Learning for Reasoning in Large Language Models with One Training Example
2025-10-24T10:02:36Z
We show that reinforcement learning with verifiable reward using one training example (1-shot RLVR) is effective in incentivizing the math reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs). Applying RLVR to the base model Qwen2.5-Math-1.5B, we identify a single example that elevates model performance on MATH500 from 36.0% to 73.6% (8.6% improvement beyond format correction), and improves the average performance across six common mathematical reasoning benchmarks from 17.6% to 35.7% (7.0% non-format gain). This result matches the performance obtained using the 1.2k DeepScaleR subset (MATH500: 73.6%, average: 35.9%), which contains the aforementioned example. Furthermore, RLVR with only two examples even slightly exceeds these results (MATH500: 74.8%, average: 36.6%). Similar substantial improvements are observed across various models (Qwen2.5-Math-7B, Llama3.2-3B-Instruct, DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-1.5B), RL algorithms (GRPO and PPO), and different math examples. In addition, we identify some interesting phenomena during 1-shot RLVR, including cross-category generalization, increased frequency of self-reflection, and sustained test performance improvement even after the training accuracy has saturated, a phenomenon we term post-saturation generalization. Moreover, we verify that the effectiveness of 1-shot RLVR primarily arises from the policy gradient loss, distinguishing it from the "grokking" phenomenon. We also show the critical role of promoting exploration (e.g., by incorporating entropy loss with an appropriate coefficient) in 1-shot RLVR training. We also further discuss related observations about format correction, label robustness and prompt modification. These findings can inspire future work on RLVR efficiency and encourage a re-examination of recent progress and the underlying mechanisms in RLVR. All resources are open source at https://github.com/ypwang61/One-Shot-RLVR.
2025-04-29T09:24:30Z
link: https://github.com/ypwang61/One-Shot-RLVR
Yiping Wang
Qing Yang
Zhiyuan Zeng
Liliang Ren
Liyuan Liu
Baolin Peng
Hao Cheng
Xuehai He
Kuan Wang
Jianfeng Gao
Weizhu Chen
Shuohang Wang
Simon Shaolei Du
Yelong Shen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20579v1
Representation Learning Preserving Ignorability and Covariate Matching for Treatment Effects
2025-04-29T09:33:56Z
Estimating treatment effects from observational data is challenging due to two main reasons: (a) hidden confounding, and (b) covariate mismatch (control and treatment groups not having identical distributions). Long lines of works exist that address only either of these issues. To address the former, conventional techniques that require detailed knowledge in the form of causal graphs have been proposed. For the latter, covariate matching and importance weighting methods have been used. Recently, there has been progress in combining testable independencies with partial side information for tackling hidden confounding. A common framework to address both hidden confounding and selection bias is missing. We propose neural architectures that aim to learn a representation of pre-treatment covariates that is a valid adjustment and also satisfies covariate matching constraints. We combine two different neural architectures: one based on gradient matching across domains created by subsampling a suitable anchor variable that assumes causal side information, followed by the other, a covariate matching transformation. We prove that approximately invariant representations yield approximate valid adjustment sets which would enable an interval around the true causal effect. In contrast to usual sensitivity analysis, where an unknown nuisance parameter is varied, we have a testable approximation yielding a bound on the effect estimate. We also outperform various baselines with respect to ATE and PEHE errors on causal benchmarks that include IHDP, Jobs, Cattaneo, and an image-based Crowd Management dataset.
2025-04-29T09:33:56Z
Praharsh Nanavati
Ranjitha Prasad
Karthikeyan Shanmugam
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20593v1
Independent Learning in Performative Markov Potential Games
2025-04-29T09:46:16Z
Performative Reinforcement Learning (PRL) refers to a scenario in which the deployed policy changes the reward and transition dynamics of the underlying environment. In this work, we study multi-agent PRL by incorporating performative effects into Markov Potential Games (MPGs). We introduce the notion of a performatively stable equilibrium (PSE) and show that it always exists under a reasonable sensitivity assumption. We then provide convergence results for state-of-the-art algorithms used to solve MPGs. Specifically, we show that independent policy gradient ascent (IPGA) and independent natural policy gradient (INPG) converge to an approximate PSE in the best-iterate sense, with an additional term that accounts for the performative effects. Furthermore, we show that INPG asymptotically converges to a PSE in the last-iterate sense. As the performative effects vanish, we recover the convergence rates from prior work. For a special case of our game, we provide finite-time last-iterate convergence results for a repeated retraining approach, in which agents independently optimize a surrogate objective. We conduct extensive experiments to validate our theoretical findings.
2025-04-29T09:46:16Z
AISTATS 2025, code available at https://github.com/PauliusSasnauskas/performative-mpgs
Rilind Sahitaj
Paulius Sasnauskas
Yiğit Yalın
Debmalya Mandal
Goran Radanović
http://arxiv.org/abs/2504.20605v2
TF1-EN-3M: Three Million Synthetic Moral Fables for Training Small, Open Language Models
2026-05-02T05:59:29Z
Moral stories are a time-tested vehicle for transmitting values, yet modern NLP lacks a large, structured corpus that couples coherent narratives with explicit ethical lessons. We present TF1-EN-3M, to our knowledge the first open dataset of three million English-language fables generated exclusively by instruction-tuned models no larger than 8B parameters. Each story follows a six-slot scaffold (character -> trait -> setting -> conflict -> resolution -> moral), produced through a combinatorial prompt engine that guarantees genre fidelity while covering a broad thematic space.
A fully reproducible evaluation pipeline employs a panel of open-weight LLM judges from distinct model families, scoring grammar, creativity, moral clarity, and template adherence, complemented by reference-free diversity and readability metrics. Among ten open-weight generator candidates, an 8B-parameter Llama-3 variant delivers the best quality-cost trade-off, producing high-scoring fables on consumer hardware at approximately $0.135 per 1,000 fables.
We release the dataset, generation code, evaluation scripts, and full metadata under a permissive license, enabling exact reproducibility and cost benchmarking. TF1-EN-3M opens avenues for research in instruction following, narrative intelligence, value alignment, and child-friendly educational AI -- demonstrating that large-scale moral storytelling requires neither proprietary giant models nor proprietary evaluation infrastructure.
2025-04-29T10:15:28Z
18 pages, 6 tables, 1 figure. v2: revised evaluation with open-weight LLM judge panel, expanded citations
Mihai Nadas
Laura Diosan
Andrei Piscoran
Andreea Tomescu
