Decisive admission bounded main-body 240-line slice; not full evidence. Source https://arxiv.org/html/2601.10572v1
1. Introduction
This paper presents our experience to understand latency variance caused
by kernel and hardware events. It includes VarMRI, a tool chain we have developed for long-term monitoring and analysis,
and a 3000-hour study of six applications and benchmarks on CloudLab (14) with the help of VarMRI.
Latency is one of the most important performance metrics of server applications.
Latencies of processing even the same type of requests can vary a lot because
of contention, slow hardware, background
activities, etc. (53, 45, 31, 29, 36, 17, 31, 19).
Such variance motivates service providers to optimize their tail latencies
to satisfy most of their users (17, 18).
A good understanding of the causes of latency variance
can often help developers to mitigate the problem by re-designing the system (18, 9, 65, 71, 27),
tuning configuration parameters (47, 76, 51, 84), or changing hardware (53, 75, 83).
The unpredictable nature of latency variance requires long-term monitoring
to understand their causes. Indeed, industrial
companies have been building such monitoring tools, such as Google Dapper (69),
Facebook Canopy (43), and Twitter Zipkin (85). However,
these tools mainly record events in the application and thus cannot analyze the impacts of kernel and hardware events
like thread scheduling, cache misses, etc. This is not ideal since these
events are known to have a significant impact on tail latency (47, 65, 71, 27).
Given that today’s OS and hardware have already provided support for recording kernel and hardware events (28, 46, 22, 21, 24),
adding them into latency analysis look like a straightforward task,
but our experiments encounter the classic challenge of “big data”: if we naively record all
events, a single Memcached server can generate 104MB of trace per second
(i.e., 9TB of trace per day). A user is unlikely to provide the additional storage space
and I/O bandwidth to store such large amount of traces; even if she did, analyzing
the trace will consume much resource.
Such results indicate that we can only afford to record a
small subset of events, which is a standard solution to reduce overhead, but as
a result, we need to answer the
key question how to select what events to record to
minimize the recording overhead while still allowing meaningful analysis.
Answering this question requires a collaborative design of trace recording
and trace analysis.
Efficient online recording.
To minimize overhead without disrupting the following analysis, VarMRI’s event recording follows two principles: first, given that
latency analysis is performed at the granularity of application requests,
if the application decides to
record a subset of requests to limit overhead (69, 43), VarMRI should only record kernel
and hardware events that are affecting these selected requests.
We find that, among the different recording granularities provided
by existing tools (i.e., the whole
machine, a process, a thread, or a CPU core), recording
events at thread granularity best fits with this principle, since thread is the basic unit to
execute requests in multi-threaded applications.
Our second principle is to record coarse-grained information first to minimize
overhead and to record additional information only when necessary.
We find that, among the different
recording modes provided by existing
tools (i.e., timing, call stack, or cumulative value), recording
cumulative values of events incurs the least I/O overhead per event and can satisfy most of our goals,
so VarMRI records cumulative values of kernel and hardware events first,
and then records their exact timing or call stacks only when necessary.
While existing tools have implemented some of the features discussed above,
our study also reveals important functions that are missing, including recording the cumulative
lengths of events and separating the effects of interrupts from thread execution. VarMRI adds these missing
pieces. Among them, we find recording cumulative length is challenging
because kernel events can preempt each other and thus
it is hard to compute their precise lengths. To address
this problem, VarMRI maintains a per-core shadow stack to simulate how the OS kernel
keeps track of the preemption relationship, which can be updated efficiently at run time.
Efficient, informative, and robust offline analysis.
VarMRI’s offline analysis needs to find events that are causing long latency.
It should satisfy several key properties:
1) efficiency:
analysis with a
complexity of O(N^{2}) (N is the number of recorded requests) or more
is not preferred; 2) informative: the analysis should tell the developer
which events are more worth optimizing, which is complicated by the
facts that many events are correlated;
3) robustness: the analysis should minimize its mathematical assumptions on the
trace data and should work with “missing data” since selective recording
only records a subset of events for each request.
Our attempts
with classic statistical methods have all failed due to violating at least one
of these properties (see Section 5 for details),
which motivates us to develop new methods. To quantify the impact
of an event, we introduce a novel metric called impact value, which estimates
the benefit of optimizing an event by comparing request latencies with and without high
values of the event: this metric is informative to the developer, easy to compute,
and does not rely on specific mathematical assumptions. We further develop two methods
to facilitate the computation of the impact value: first, VarMRI applies line-based curve fitting on the CDF of an event’s values
to identify “high” value of the event;
second,
VarMRI incorporates two domain-specific
rules to infer the causal relationship among events and adjust their impact values
accordingly.
Results from long-term experiments.
With the help of VarMRI,
we have carried out a 3000-hour study of six applications and benchmarks
on CloudLab (14).
•
VarMRI has identified a variety of kernel and hardware events causing
tail latencies within each experiment;
optimizing them can reduce tail latencies by up to 31%, despite that we have
avoided complicated optimizations. The prevalence
and impact of these events have confirmed the importance of including them
in latency variance analysis.
•
VarMRI has also identified events whose impacts can vary across different
experiments, which can explain the performance variance. For example,
we find the burstiness of interrupts can vary: more bursty interrupts can cause higher tail latency
but lower median latency.
Such results have confirmed the necessity of long-term monitoring.
•
VarMRI’s support of selective recording allows one to adjust the overhead by tuning the
selection rate. For example, recording events for 1% of the requests in Memcached generates
1MB of trace per second, reduces maximal throughput by 0.49%, and has no
observable impact on p99 latency.
2. Background and related work
Many previous works have discussed the importance and the possible causes of latency variance (17, 18, 47, 4, 63, 53, 41),
which have motivated a number of analysis tools (34, 6, 5, 12, 26, 69, 66, 49, 50, 68, 13, 43, 82, 81, 67).
They can record and analyze different types of events in the following ways:
Application events.
At the application level, the standard solution is to annotate application code
to print the timing of different code blocks (called AppTasks in this paper): by comparing
the patterns of different requests, we may find code blocks that are only
executed or take longer to execute in long-latency requests.
Existing tools can identify important code blocks by relying on developers’
annotations (6, 69, 13, 43, 12, 66),
extracting events from the application logs (82, 78), identifying events automatically (5),
or using a mixture of these techniques (34, 69).
In a multi-threaded or distributed application, the execution of a request may create multiple AppTasks spanning different
threads or processes. To find the critical path of such complicated
execution, existing tools can model request execution using paths (12),
trees (26, 69, 11, 6),
or directed acyclic graphs (DAG) (66, 50, 68, 25, 49).
Kernel events.
Modern OSes have built-in tools to record kernel events (e.g., perf, eBPF,
ftrace, kprobe/kretprobe in Linux (28, 46, 22, 62); DTrace in Solaris (21); ETW in Windows (24), etc.),
which have been continuously improved (79, 23).
These OSes have predefined many events, called trace points,
and these tools can record these predefined events in different modes: they can record
events on the whole machine, on a particular CPU core, on a particular process, or on a particular
thread; they can record the timing of these events, the call stack
of them, or the cumulative count of them.
A few of the analysis tools mentioned above, such as DARC (72) and Magpie (6),
rely on OS built-in tools to record kernel events. However, as shown in Section 4, we encounter
additional challenges when utilizing existing OS built-in tools for
long-term monitoring.
Hardware events.
Many hardware devices provide performance counters to help developers to investigate their internal behavior.
To limit overhead, some devices can only record a small subset
of performance counters at a time. For example, Intel Xeon Silver 4114 CPU provides
201 performance counters but can only record seven of them
at a time (three of them are fixed and four of them are configurable) (38).
Figure 1. The architecture of VarMRI.
3. Overview of VarMRI
VarMRI records kernel and hardware events at run time
and analyzes their impacts on request latency offline.
VarMRI does not target events in the application,
so for a comprehensive analysis, it should be used together with
existing application-level tools like Zipkin.
Kernel events.
VarMRI records information about thread scheduling, interrupts, and
faults because they are usually invisible to the application (72, 83).
VarMRI does not record system calls because they can be captured
by the application.
Hardware events.
VarMRI records performance counters from
the CPU, such as the number of cache
misses.
In addition, VarMRI computes the average CPU frequency (i.e., \frac{cycles}{time})
as an additional counter.
Although the current implementation of VarMRI does not
record events from other types of hardware, it can easily be extended
to support hardware which provides similar performance counters.
Architecture and workflow of VarMRI.
Figure 1 shows the architecture of VarMRI.
A developer should first annotate the
target piece of code to analyze with the APIs provided by VarMRI: this can be done
either manually or automatically with the help of other tools (5, 34, 72), and we observe
many softwares already annotate and record the execution of important
pieces of code. Then the developer can run the annotated application
with VarMRI’s online modules (i.e., VarMRI lib and VarMRI kernel module; Section 4), which
will record the values of kernel and hardware events into a trace file.
Finally she should run the VarMRI analyzer offline to generate a list
of events ranked by their impacts (Section 5).
This architecture is not much different from
other tools (62, 59, 28, 6, 72).
Limitation of VarMRI.
Like most performance profiling tools (62, 59, 80, 30, 28), VarMRI only reports potential problems to the developer, but
does not address these problems.
VarMRI selectively records a subset of events to limit overhead.
An inherent limitation of selective recording is that it may miss very rare
events, if they happen to be not selected when they occur. Therefore, VarMRI is only
effective when problematic
events are reproducible with a non-negligible possibility. However, given
that a number of production
systems (e.g., Google Dapper (70), Facebook Canopy (43), etc.)
already adopt selective recording at the application level to reduce overhead, this limitation is arguably inevitable.
Motivating example.
We built a toy application, in which
every request executes an empty loop: for(int i=0; i<max, i++){} (max=25K).
We disabled compiler
optimization in case it eliminates the loop.
Our initial purpose to build this application
is to create a simple baseline without
any internal variance, so that we can use it to measure
variance caused by external events like scheduling and interrupts.
Surprisingly, however,
it incurs a non-negligible variance: while 50% of the requests have a latency of about 60us, the remaining
ones can reach 90us. We had a few guesses about the cause, but without a proper tool, we were
not able to confirm the cause. In the following two sections,
we will present how VarMRI records and analyzes events using this example.
4. Low-overhead recording
VarMRI needs to record event information at runtime.
We first explore whether we can utilize existing
tools.
Perhaps not surprisingly, we find
extensive recording will incur a large I/O and space overhead:
when using ftrace to record the timing of all
interrupt and thread scheduling events for a Memcached server,
it can
generate about 104MB of trace per second: this is about 9TB of trace per day.
Such result is reasonable since
Memcached can process millions of requests per second.
We have tried other applications and other recording tools, and find that
it is common for them to generate tens of MBs of trace per second (see Section 7).
Such overhead is unlikely to be acceptable in the long term.
Such result suggests that we can only afford to record a small subset
of events. We call this mechanism selective recording in this paper.
This observation is consistent with prior reports. For example, Google reports
that it records one out of 1024 requests in Dapper and considers further lowering
the rate (69).
Selective recording brings the question which events we should record:
the subset of events we record must allow meaningful analysis, and
must fit with selective recording at the application level.
4.1. VarMRI’s approaches
To minimize recording overhead without disrupting the following analysis,
VarMRI follows two principles.
Design principle 1: record events that are affecting the selected requests.
Because latency is defined on the granularity of application requests, eventually VarMRI’s offline analysis
has to answer the question which events are contributing to the latency of different requests.
Therefore, if the application selectively records a subset of requests, VarMRI should record
kernel and hardware events that are affecting these requests; otherwise, VarMRI may record events that are
useless in the following offline analysis.
Existing kernel tools can record events happened on the whole machine, a particular
CPU core, a particular process, or a particular thread (62, 28, 46). We find recording
events at thread granularity fits well with our first principle, due to the following reason: as mentioned
