https://arxiv.org/api/3EWnqXR5rsTZuNwYOwmI4VL9rSI
arXiv Query: search_query=(cat:cs.CL OR cat:cs.LG OR cat:cs.DC OR cat:cs.AI OR cat:cs.AR OR cat:cs.PL OR cat:cs.OS OR cat:cs.PF OR cat:cs.IR OR cat:cs.MA OR cat:cs.CV OR cat:cs.RO) AND submittedDate:"202510291800 TO 202510301800" AND ( (ti:agent OR ti:multimodal OR ti:"world model" OR ti:VLA OR ti:diffusion) AND (all:"language model" OR all:"foundation model" OR all:"vision language" OR ti:"world model") )&id_list=&start=0&max_results=50
2026-10-04T22:22:05Z
50
29
0
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.25863v2
AAGATE: A NIST AI RMF-Aligned Governance Platform for Agentic AI
2025-11-03T20:37:10Z
This paper introduces the Agentic AI Governance Assurance & Trust Engine (AAGATE), a Kubernetes-native control plane designed to address the unique security and governance challenges posed by autonomous, language-model-driven agents in production. Recognizing the limitations of traditional Application Security (AppSec) tooling for improvisational, machine-speed systems, AAGATE operationalizes the NIST AI Risk Management Framework (AI RMF). It integrates specialized security frameworks for each RMF function: the Agentic AI Threat Modeling MAESTRO framework for Map, a hybrid of OWASP's AIVSS and SEI's SSVC for Measure, and the Cloud Security Alliance's Agentic AI Red Teaming Guide for Manage. By incorporating a zero-trust service mesh, an explainable policy engine, behavioral analytics, and decentralized accountability hooks, AAGATE provides a continuous, verifiable governance solution for agentic AI, enabling safe, accountable, and scalable deployment. The framework is further extended with DIRF for digital identity rights, LPCI defenses for logic-layer injection, and QSAF monitors for cognitive degradation, ensuring governance spans systemic, adversarial, and ethical risks.
2025-10-29T18:06:28Z
Ken Huang
Kyriakos Rock Lambros
Jerry Huang
Yasir Mehmood
Hammad Atta
Joshua Beck
Vineeth Sai Narajala
Muhammad Zeeshan Baig
Muhammad Aziz Ul Haq
Nadeem Shahzad
Bhavya Gupta
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.25914v1
FinOps Agent -- A Use-Case for IT Infrastructure and Cost Optimization
2025-10-29T19:34:14Z
FinOps (Finance + Operations) represents an operational framework and cultural practice which maximizes cloud business value through collaborative financial accountability across engineering, finance, and business teams. FinOps practitioners face a fundamental challenge: billing data arrives in heterogeneous formats, taxonomies, and metrics from multiple cloud providers and internal systems which eventually lead to synthesizing actionable insights, and making time-sensitive decisions. To address this challenge, we propose leveraging autonomous, goal-driven AI agents for FinOps automation. In this paper, we built a FinOps agent for a typical use-case for IT infrastructure and cost optimization. We built a system simulating a realistic end-to-end industry process starting with retrieving data from various sources to consolidating and analyzing the data to generate recommendations for optimization. We defined a set of metrics to evaluate our agent using several open-source and close-source language models and it shows that the agent was able to understand, plan, and execute tasks as well as an actual FinOps practitioner.
2025-10-29T19:34:14Z
Ngoc Phuoc An Vo
Manish Kesarwani
Ruchi Mahindru
Chandrasekhar Narayanaswami
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.25941v3
RECAP: Reproducing Copyrighted Data from LLMs Training with an Agentic Pipeline
2026-03-13T15:22:35Z
If we cannot inspect the training data of a large language model (LLM), how can we ever know what it has seen? We believe the most compelling evidence arises when the model itself freely reproduces the target content. As such, we propose RECAP, an agentic pipeline designed to elicit and verify memorized training data from LLM outputs. At the heart of RECAP is a feedback-driven loop, where an initial extraction attempt is evaluated by a secondary language model, which compares the output against a reference passage and identifies discrepancies. These are then translated into minimal correction hints, which are fed back into the target model to guide subsequent generations. In addition, to address alignment-induced refusals, RECAP includes a jailbreaking module that detects and overcomes such barriers. We evaluate RECAP on EchoTrace, a new benchmark spanning over 30 full books, and the results show that RECAP leads to substantial gains over single-iteration approaches. For instance, with GPT-4.1, the average ROUGE-L score for the copyrighted text extraction improved from 0.38 to 0.47 - a nearly 24% increase.
2025-10-29T20:36:37Z
André V. Duarte
Xuying li
Bin Zeng
Arlindo L. Oliveira
Lei Li
Zhuo Li
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26052v1
Dynamic VLM-Guided Negative Prompting for Diffusion Models
2025-10-30T01:10:25Z
We propose a novel approach for dynamic negative prompting in diffusion models that leverages Vision-Language Models (VLMs) to adaptively generate negative prompts during the denoising process. Unlike traditional Negative Prompting methods that use fixed negative prompts, our method generates intermediate image predictions at specific denoising steps and queries a VLM to produce contextually appropriate negative prompts. We evaluate our approach on various benchmark datasets and demonstrate the trade-offs between negative guidance strength and text-image alignment.
2025-10-30T01:10:25Z
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) Workshop: The First Workshop on Generative and Protective AI for Content Creation
Hoyeon Chang
Seungjin Kim
Yoonseok Choi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26114v1
OracleAgent: A Multimodal Reasoning Agent for Oracle Bone Script Research
2025-10-30T03:54:53Z
As one of the earliest writing systems, Oracle Bone Script (OBS) preserves the cultural and intellectual heritage of ancient civilizations. However, current OBS research faces two major challenges: (1) the interpretation of OBS involves a complex workflow comprising multiple serial and parallel sub-tasks, and (2) the efficiency of OBS information organization and retrieval remains a critical bottleneck, as scholars often spend substantial effort searching for, compiling, and managing relevant resources. To address these challenges, we present OracleAgent, the first agent system designed for the structured management and retrieval of OBS-related information. OracleAgent seamlessly integrates multiple OBS analysis tools, empowered by large language models (LLMs), and can flexibly orchestrate these components. Additionally, we construct a comprehensive domain-specific multimodal knowledge base for OBS, which is built through a rigorous multi-year process of data collection, cleaning, and expert annotation. The knowledge base comprises over 1.4M single-character rubbing images and 80K interpretation texts. OracleAgent leverages this resource through its multimodal tools to assist experts in retrieval tasks of character, document, interpretation text, and rubbing image. Extensive experiments demonstrate that OracleAgent achieves superior performance across a range of multimodal reasoning and generation tasks, surpassing leading mainstream multimodal large language models (MLLMs) (e.g., GPT-4o). Furthermore, our case study illustrates that OracleAgent can effectively assist domain experts, significantly reducing the time cost of OBS research. These results highlight OracleAgent as a significant step toward the practical deployment of OBS-assisted research and automated interpretation systems.
2025-10-30T03:54:53Z
Caoshuo Li
Zengmao Ding
Xiaobin Hu
Bang Li
Donghao Luo
Xu Peng
Taisong Jin
Yongge Liu
Shengwei Han
Jing Yang
Xiaoping He
Feng Gao
AndyPian Wu
SevenShu
Chaoyang Wang
Chengjie Wang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26144v2
The FM Agent
2026-02-28T04:28:26Z
Large language models (LLMs) are catalyzing the development of autonomous AI research agents for scientific and engineering discovery. We present FM Agent, a novel and general-purpose multi-agent framework that leverages a synergistic combination of LLM-based reasoning and large-scale evolutionary search to address complex real-world challenges. The core of FM Agent integrates several key innovations: 1) a cold-start initialization phase incorporating expert guidance, 2) a novel evolutionary sampling strategy for iterative optimization, 3) domain-specific evaluators that combine correctness, effectiveness, and LLM-supervised feedback, and 4) a distributed, asynchronous execution infrastructure built on Ray. Demonstrating broad applicability, our system has been evaluated across diverse domains, including operations research, machine learning, GPU kernel optimization, and classical mathematical problems. FM Agent reaches state-of-the-art results autonomously, without human interpretation or tuning -- 1976.3 on ALE-Bench (+5.2\%), 43.56\% on MLE-Bench (+4.0pp), up to 20x speedups on KernelBench, and establishes new state-of-the-art(SOTA) results on several classical mathematical problems. Beyond academic benchmarks, FM Agent shows considerable promise for both large-scale enterprise R\&D workflows and fundamental scientific research, where it can accelerate innovation, automate complex discovery processes, and deliver substantial engineering and scientific advances with broader societal impact.
2025-10-30T04:57:57Z
Annan Li
Chufan Wu
Zengle Ge
Yee Hin Chong
Zhinan Hou
Lizhe Cao
Cheng Ju
Jianmin Wu
Huaiming Li
Haobo Zhang
Shenghao Feng
Mo Zhao
Fengzhi Qiu
Rui Yang
Mengmeng Zhang
Wenyi Zhu
Yingying Sun
Quan Sun
Shunhao Yan
Danyu Liu
Dawei Yin
Dou Shen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26167v2
ToolRM: Towards Agentic Tool-Use Reward Modeling
2026-01-13T13:28:26Z
Reward models (RMs) play a critical role in aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences. Yet in the domain of tool learning, the lack of RMs specifically designed for function-calling tasks has limited progress toward more capable agentic AI. We introduce ToolRM, a family of lightweight reward models tailored for general tool-use scenarios. To build these models, we propose a novel pipeline that constructs high-quality pairwise preference data using rule-based scoring and multidimensional sampling. This yields ToolPref-Pairwise-30K, a diverse, balanced, and challenging preference dataset that supports both generative and discriminative reward modeling. We also introduce TRBench$_{BFCL}$, a benchmark built on the agent evaluation suite BFCL to evaluate RMs on tool calling tasks. Trained on our constructed data, models from the Qwen3-4B/8B series achieve up to 17.94% higher accuracy, substantially outperforming frontier LLMs and RMs in pairwise reward judgments. Beyond training objectives, generative ToolRM generalizes to broader critique tasks, including Best-of-N sampling and self-correction. Experiments on ACEBench highlight its effectiveness and efficiency, enabling inference-time scaling while reducing output token usage by over 66%. Its support for downstream RL training further validates its practical utility. We release data to facilitate future research.
2025-10-30T06:08:27Z
Renhao Li
Jianhong Tu
Yang Su
Yantao Liu
Fei Huang
Hamid Alinejad-Rokny
Derek F. Wong
Junyang Lin
Min Yang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26172v2
Linking Heterogeneous Data with Coordinated Agent Flows for Social Media Analysis
2026-07-30T11:03:54Z
Social media platforms generate volumes of heterogeneous data, capturing user behaviors, textual content, and network structures. Analyzing such data is crucial for understanding phenomena such as opinion dynamics, community formation, and information diffusion. However, discovering insights from this complex landscape is exploratory, conceptually challenging, and requires expertise in social media mining and visualization. Existing automated approaches, including large language models (LLMs), remain largely confined to structured tabular data and cannot adequately address the heterogeneity of social media analysis. We present SIA (Social Insight Agents), an LLM agent system that links heterogeneous multi-modal data, including raw inputs (e.g., text, network, and behavioral data), mined analytical results, and rendered visual artifacts, through coordinated agent flows. Guided by an insight-oriented taxonomy connecting insight types with suitable mining methods and visualization strategies, SIA adopts a stage-synchronized strategy that proceeds through goal decomposition, query, mining, visualization, and reporting stages. At each stage, it collects prior information to jointly plan and execute agent actions, while the coordinator maintains cross-stage action dependencies and assembles and distributes data to agents. Through quantitative evaluation and case studies supported by an interactive interface, we show that SIA can discover diverse and meaningful insights from social media with opportunities for subsequent reliability assessment.
2025-10-30T06:22:49Z
Shifu Chen
Dazhen Deng
Zhihong Xu
Sijia Xu
Linyu Qin
Tai-Quan Peng
Yingcai Wu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26200v1
Don't Let It Fade: Preserving Edits in Diffusion Language Models via Token Timestep Allocation
2025-10-30T07:21:05Z
While diffusion language models (DLMs) enable fine-grained refinement, their practical controllability remains fragile. We identify and formally characterize a central failure mode called update forgetting, in which uniform and context agnostic updates induce token level fluctuations across timesteps, erasing earlier semantic edits and disrupting the cumulative refinement process, thereby degrading fluency and coherence. As this failure originates in uniform and context agnostic updates, effective control demands explicit token ordering. We propose Token Timestep Allocation (TTA), which realizes soft and semantic token ordering via per token timestep schedules: critical tokens are frozen early, while uncertain tokens receive continued refinement. This timestep based ordering can be instantiated as either a fixed policy or an adaptive policy driven by task signals, thereby supporting a broad spectrum of refinement strategies. Because it operates purely at inference time, it applies uniformly across various DLMs and naturally extends to diverse supervision sources. Empirically, TTA improves controllability and fluency: on sentiment control, it yields more than 20 percent higher accuracy and nearly halves perplexity using less than one fifth the steps; in detoxification, it lowers maximum toxicity (12.2 versus 14.5) and perplexity (26.0 versus 32.0). Together, these results demonstrate that softened ordering via timestep allocation is the critical lever for mitigating update forgetting and achieving stable and controllable diffusion text generation.
2025-10-30T07:21:05Z
Accepted in NeurIPS 2025
Woojin Kim
Jaeyoung Do
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26242v1
Retrieval Augmented Generation-Enhanced Distributed LLM Agents for Generalizable Traffic Signal Control with Emergency Vehicles
2025-10-30T08:23:08Z
With increasing urban traffic complexity, Traffic Signal Control (TSC) is essential for optimizing traffic flow and improving road safety. Large Language Models (LLMs) emerge as promising approaches for TSC. However, they are prone to hallucinations in emergencies, leading to unreliable decisions that may cause substantial delays for emergency vehicles. Moreover, diverse intersection types present substantial challenges for traffic state encoding and cross-intersection training, limiting generalization across heterogeneous intersections. Therefore, this paper proposes Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG)-enhanced distributed LLM agents with Emergency response for Generalizable TSC (REG-TSC). Firstly, this paper presents an emergency-aware reasoning framework, which dynamically adjusts reasoning depth based on the emergency scenario and is equipped with a novel Reviewer-based Emergency RAG (RERAG) to distill specific knowledge and guidance from historical cases, enhancing the reliability and rationality of agents' emergency decisions. Secondly, this paper designs a type-agnostic traffic representation and proposes a Reward-guided Reinforced Refinement (R3) for heterogeneous intersections. R3 adaptively samples training experience from diverse intersections with environment feedback-based priority and fine-tunes LLM agents with a designed reward-weighted likelihood loss, guiding REG-TSC toward high-reward policies across heterogeneous intersections. On three real-world road networks with 17 to 177 heterogeneous intersections, extensive experiments show that REG-TSC reduces travel time by 42.00%, queue length by 62.31%, and emergency vehicle waiting time by 83.16%, outperforming other state-of-the-art methods.
2025-10-30T08:23:08Z
Xinhang Li
Qing Guo
Junyu Chen
Zheng Guo
Shengzhe Xu
Lei Li
Lin Zhang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.00095v1
SpinalSAM-R1: A Vision-Language Multimodal Interactive System for Spine CT Segmentation
2025-10-30T10:14:42Z
The anatomical structure segmentation of the spine and adjacent structures from computed tomography (CT) images is a key step for spinal disease diagnosis and treatment. However, the segmentation of CT images is impeded by low contrast and complex vertebral boundaries. Although advanced models such as the Segment Anything Model (SAM) have shown promise in various segmentation tasks, their performance in spinal CT imaging is limited by high annotation requirements and poor domain adaptability. To address these limitations, we propose SpinalSAM-R1, a multimodal vision-language interactive system that integrates a fine-tuned SAM with DeepSeek-R1, for spine CT image segmentation. Specifically, our SpinalSAM-R1 introduces an anatomy-guided attention mechanism to improve spine segmentation performance, and a semantics-driven interaction protocol powered by DeepSeek-R1, enabling natural language-guided refinement. The SpinalSAM-R1 is fine-tuned using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA) for efficient adaptation. We validate our SpinalSAM-R1 on the spine anatomical structure with CT images. Experimental results suggest that our method achieves superior segmentation performance. Meanwhile, we develop a PyQt5-based interactive software, which supports point, box, and text-based prompts. The system supports 11 clinical operations with 94.3\% parsing accuracy and sub-800 ms response times. The software is released on https://github.com/6jm233333/spinalsam-r1.
2025-10-30T10:14:42Z
2 Tables,5 Figures,16 Equations
Jiaming Liu
Dingwei Fan
Junyong Zhao
Chunlin Li
Haipeng Si
Liang Sun
http://arxiv.org/abs/2511.00096v1
Urban-MAS: Human-Centered Urban Prediction with LLM-Based Multi-Agent System
2025-10-30T10:26:02Z
Urban Artificial Intelligence (Urban AI) has advanced human-centered urban tasks such as perception prediction and human dynamics. Large Language Models (LLMs) can integrate multimodal inputs to address heterogeneous data in complex urban systems but often underperform on domain-specific tasks. Urban-MAS, an LLM-based Multi-Agent System (MAS) framework, is introduced for human-centered urban prediction under zero-shot settings. It includes three agent types: Predictive Factor Guidance Agents, which prioritize key predictive factors to guide knowledge extraction and enhance the effectiveness of compressed urban knowledge in LLMs; Reliable UrbanInfo Extraction Agents, which improve robustness by comparing multiple outputs, validating consistency, and re-extracting when conflicts occur; and Multi-UrbanInfo Inference Agents, which integrate extracted multi-source information across dimensions for prediction. Experiments on running-amount prediction and urban perception across Tokyo, Milan, and Seattle demonstrate that Urban-MAS substantially reduces errors compared to single-LLM baselines. Ablation studies indicate that Predictive Factor Guidance Agents are most critical for enhancing predictive performance, positioning Urban-MAS as a scalable paradigm for human-centered urban AI prediction. Code is available on the project website:https://github.com/THETUREHOOHA/UrbanMAS
2025-10-30T10:26:02Z
Accepted to The 3rd ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on Advances in Urban AI (UrbanAI'25)
Shangyu Lou
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26339v1
GLYPH-SR: Can We Achieve Both High-Quality Image Super-Resolution and High-Fidelity Text Recovery via VLM-guided Latent Diffusion Model?
2025-10-30T10:46:28Z
Image super-resolution(SR) is fundamental to many vision system-from surveillance and autonomy to document analysis and retail analytics-because recovering high-frequency details, especially scene-text, enables reliable downstream perception. Scene-text, i.e., text embedded in natural images such as signs, product labels, and storefronts, often carries the most actionable information; when characters are blurred or hallucinated, optical character recognition(OCR) and subsequent decisions fail even if the rest of the image appears sharp. Yet previous SR research has often been tuned to distortion (PSNR/SSIM) or learned perceptual metrics (LIPIS, MANIQA, CLIP-IQA, MUSIQ) that are largely insensitive to character-level errors. Furthermore, studies that do address text SR often focus on simplified benchmarks with isolated characters, overlooking the challenges of text within complex natural scenes. As a result, scene-text is effectively treated as generic texture. For SR to be effective in practical deployments, it is therefore essential to explicitly optimize for both text legibility and perceptual quality. We present GLYPH-SR, a vision-language-guided diffusion framework that aims to achieve both objectives jointly. GLYPH-SR utilizes a Text-SR Fusion ControlNet(TS-ControlNet) guided by OCR data, and a ping-pong scheduler that alternates between text- and scene-centric guidance. To enable targeted text restoration, we train these components on a synthetic corpus while keeping the main SR branch frozen. Across SVT, SCUT-CTW1500, and CUTE80 at x4, and x8, GLYPH-SR improves OCR F1 by up to +15.18 percentage points over diffusion/GAN baseline (SVT x8, OpenOCR) while maintaining competitive MANIQA, CLIP-IQA, and MUSIQ. GLYPH-SR is designed to satisfy both objectives simultaneously-high readability and high visual realism-delivering SR that looks right and reds right.
2025-10-30T10:46:28Z
11 pages, 6 figures. Includes supplementary material. Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Mingyu Sung
Seungjae Ham
Kangwoo Kim
Yeokyoung Yoon
Sangseok Yun
Il-Min Kim
Jae-Mo Kang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26352v2
The Geometry of Dialogue: Graphing Language Models to Reveal Synergistic Teams for Multi-Agent Collaboration
2026-03-19T09:40:13Z
While a multi-agent approach based on large language models (LLMs) represents a promising strategy to surpass the capabilities of single models, its success is critically dependent on synergistic team composition. However, forming optimal teams is a significant challenge, as the inherent opacity of most models obscures the internal characteristics necessary for effective collaboration. In this paper, we propose an interaction-centric framework for automatic team composition that does not require any prior knowledge including their internal architectures, training data, or task performances. Our method constructs a "language model graph" that maps relationships between models from the semantic coherence of pairwise conversations, and then applies community detection to identify synergistic model clusters. Our experiments with diverse LLMs demonstrate that the proposed method discovers functionally coherent groups that reflect their latent specializations. Priming conversations with specific topics identified synergistic teams which outperform random baselines on downstream benchmarks and achieve comparable accuracy to that of manually-curated teams based on known model specializations. Our findings provide a new basis for the automated design of collaborative multi-agent LLM teams.
2025-10-30T11:04:15Z
Accepted at the AAAI-26 Workshop on LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems: Towards Responsible, Reliable, and Scalable Agentic Systems (LaMAS 2026) as an oral presentation
Kotaro Furuya
Yuichi Kitagawa
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26433v2
Co-Evolving Latent Action World Models
2026-04-06T15:21:53Z
Adapting pretrained video generation models into controllable world models via latent actions is a promising step towards creating generalist world models. The dominant paradigm adopts a two-stage approach that trains latent action model (LAM) and the world model separately, resulting in redundant training and limiting their potential for co-adaptation. A conceptually simple and appealing idea is to directly replace the forward dynamic model in LAM with a powerful world model and training them jointly, but it is non-trivial and prone to representational collapse. In this work, we propose CoLA-World, which for the first time successfully realizes this synergistic paradigm, resolving the core challenge in joint learning through a critical warm-up phase that effectively aligns the representations of the from-scratch LAM with the pretrained world model. This unlocks a co-evolution cycle: the world model acts as a knowledgeable tutor, providing gradients to shape a high-quality LAM, while the LAM offers a more precise and adaptable control interface to the world model. Empirically, CoLA-World matches or outperforms prior two-stage methods in both video simulation quality and downstream visual planning, establishing a robust and efficient new paradigm for the field.
2025-10-30T12:28:40Z
Yucen Wang
Fengming Zhang
De-Chuan Zhan
Li Zhao
Kaixin Wang
Jiang Bian
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26494v1
Simulating and Experimenting with Social Media Mobilization Using LLM Agents
2025-10-30T13:43:28Z
Online social networks have transformed the ways in which political mobilization messages are disseminated, raising new questions about how peer influence operates at scale. Building on the landmark 61-million-person Facebook experiment \citep{bond201261}, we develop an agent-based simulation framework that integrates real U.S. Census demographic distributions, authentic Twitter network topology, and heterogeneous large language model (LLM) agents to examine the effect of mobilization messages on voter turnout. Each simulated agent is assigned demographic attributes, a personal political stance, and an LLM variant (\texttt{GPT-4.1}, \texttt{GPT-4.1-Mini}, or \texttt{GPT-4.1-Nano}) reflecting its political sophistication. Agents interact over realistic social network structures, receiving personalized feeds and dynamically updating their engagement behaviors and voting intentions. Experimental conditions replicate the informational and social mobilization treatments of the original Facebook study. Across scenarios, the simulator reproduces qualitative patterns observed in field experiments, including stronger mobilization effects under social message treatments and measurable peer spillovers. Our framework provides a controlled, reproducible environment for testing counterfactual designs and sensitivity analyses in political mobilization research, offering a bridge between high-validity field experiments and flexible computational modeling.\footnote{Code and data available at https://github.com/CausalMP/LLM-SocioPol}
2025-10-30T13:43:28Z
Sadegh Shirani
Mohsen Bayati
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26498v1
A Multi-agent Large Language Model Framework to Automatically Assess Performance of a Clinical AI Triage Tool
2025-10-30T13:50:19Z
Purpose: The purpose of this study was to determine if an ensemble of multiple LLM agents could be used collectively to provide a more reliable assessment of a pixel-based AI triage tool than a single LLM.
Methods: 29,766 non-contrast CT head exams from fourteen hospitals were processed by a commercial intracranial hemorrhage (ICH) AI detection tool. Radiology reports were analyzed by an ensemble of eight open-source LLM models and a HIPAA compliant internal version of GPT-4o using a single multi-shot prompt that assessed for presence of ICH. 1,726 examples were manually reviewed. Performance characteristics of the eight open-source models and consensus were compared to GPT-4o. Three ideal consensus LLM ensembles were tested for rating the performance of the triage tool.
Results: The cohort consisted of 29,766 head CTs exam-report pairs. The highest AUC performance was achieved with llama3.3:70b and GPT-4o (AUC= 0.78). The average precision was highest for Llama3.3:70b and GPT-4o (AP=0.75 & 0.76). Llama3.3:70b had the highest F1 score (0.81) and recall (0.85), greater precision (0.78), specificity (0.72), and MCC (0.57). Using MCC (95% CI) the ideal combination of LLMs were: Full-9 Ensemble 0.571 (0.552-0.591), Top-3 Ensemble 0.558 (0.537-0.579), Consensus 0.556 (0.539-0.574), and GPT4o 0.522 (0.500-0.543). No statistically significant differences were observed between Top-3, Full-9, and Consensus (p > 0.05).
Conclusion: An ensemble of medium to large sized open-source LLMs provides a more consistent and reliable method to derive a ground truth retrospective evaluation of a clinical AI triage tool over a single LLM alone.
2025-10-30T13:50:19Z
29 pages, 3 figures, 4 tables
Adam E. Flanders
Yifan Peng
Luciano Prevedello
Robyn Ball
Errol Colak
Prahlad Menon
George Shih
Hui-Ming Lin
Paras Lakhani
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26583v1
Emu3.5: Native Multimodal Models are World Learners
2025-10-30T15:11:16Z
We introduce Emu3.5, a large-scale multimodal world model that natively predicts the next state across vision and language. Emu3.5 is pre-trained end-to-end with a unified next-token prediction objective on a corpus of vision-language interleaved data containing over 10 trillion tokens, primarily derived from sequential frames and transcripts of internet videos. The model naturally accepts interleaved vision-language inputs and generates interleaved vision-language outputs. Emu3.5 is further post-trained with large-scale reinforcement learning to enhance multimodal reasoning and generation. To improve inference efficiency, we propose Discrete Diffusion Adaptation (DiDA), which converts token-by-token decoding into bidirectional parallel prediction, accelerating per-image inference by about 20x without sacrificing performance. Emu3.5 exhibits strong native multimodal capabilities, including long-horizon vision-language generation, any-to-image (X2I) generation, and complex text-rich image generation. It also exhibits generalizable world-modeling abilities, enabling spatiotemporally consistent world exploration and open-world embodied manipulation across diverse scenarios and tasks. For comparison, Emu3.5 achieves performance comparable to Gemini 2.5 Flash Image (Nano Banana) on image generation and editing tasks and demonstrates superior results on a suite of interleaved generation tasks. We open-source Emu3.5 at https://github.com/baaivision/Emu3.5 to support community research.
2025-10-30T15:11:16Z
project page: https://emu.world
Yufeng Cui
Honghao Chen
Haoge Deng
Xu Huang
Xinghang Li
Jirong Liu
Yang Liu
Zhuoyan Luo
Jinsheng Wang
Wenxuan Wang
Yueze Wang
Chengyuan Wang
Fan Zhang
Yingli Zhao
Ting Pan
Xianduo Li
Zecheng Hao
Wenxuan Ma
Zhuo Chen
Yulong Ao
Tiejun Huang
Zhongyuan Wang
Xinlong Wang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26585v2
Stop Wasting Your Tokens: Towards Efficient Runtime Multi-Agent Systems
2026-03-02T05:41:00Z
While Multi-Agent Systems (MAS) excel at complex tasks, their growing autonomy with operational complexity often leads to critical inefficiencies, such as excessive token consumption and failures arising from misinformation. Existing methods primarily focus on post-hoc failure attribution, lacking proactive, real-time interventions to enhance robustness and efficiency. To this end, we introduce SupervisorAgent, a lightweight and modular framework for runtime, adaptive supervision that operates without altering the base agent's architecture. Triggered by an LLM-free adaptive filter, SupervisorAgent intervenes at critical junctures to proactively correct errors, guide inefficient behaviors, and purify observations. On the challenging GAIA benchmark, SupervisorAgent reduces the token consumption of the Smolagent framework by an average of 29.68% without compromising its success rate. Extensive experiments across five additional benchmarks (math reasoning, code generation, and question answering) and various SoTA foundation models validate the broad applicability and robustness of our approach.
2025-10-30T15:12:59Z
Accepted to ICLR 2026. The code is available at https://github.com/LINs-lab/SupervisorAgent
Fulin Lin
Shaowen Chen
Ruishan Fang
Hongwei Wang
Tao Lin
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26852v2
CATArena: Evaluating Evolutionary Capabilities of Code Agents via Iterative Tournaments
2026-01-30T11:04:12Z
Current evaluation for Large Language Model (LLM) code agents predominantly focus on generating functional code in single-turn scenarios, which fails to evaluate the agent's capability for continuous code optimization and multi-turn iterative development. To bridge this gap, we introduce CATArena, a framework designed to evaluate the evolutionary capabilities of code agents via iterative tournaments. Agents engage in multi-turn tournaments and continuously refine their code through self-reflection and peer-learning based on comprehensive execution feedback. For evaluation, we propose a dual-metric system to decouple static generation proficiency from evolutionary potential. Extensive experiments reveal that an agent's evolutionary potential is not strictly correlated with its initial proficiency. Our analysis further reveals that current agents struggle to concurrently leverage both peer-learning and self-reflection for effective performance gains. Furthermore, the results validate CATArena's high extensibility and resistance to variance tasks, establishing it as a continuous and reliable standard for assessing the evolutionary capability of LLM code agents.
2025-10-30T15:22:53Z
Lingyue Fu
Xin Ding
Linyue Pan
Yaoming Zhu
Shao Zhang
Lin Qiu
Weiwen Liu
Weinan Zhang
Xuezhi Cao
Xunliang Cai
Jiaxin Ding
Yong Yu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26603v1
Agentic AI Home Energy Management System: A Large Language Model Framework for Residential Load Scheduling
2025-10-30T15:33:52Z
The electricity sector transition requires substantial increases in residential demand response capacity, yet Home Energy Management Systems (HEMS) adoption remains limited by user interaction barriers requiring translation of everyday preferences into technical parameters. While large language models have been applied to energy systems as code generators and parameter extractors, no existing implementation deploys LLMs as autonomous coordinators managing the complete workflow from natural language input to multi-appliance scheduling. This paper presents an agentic AI HEMS where LLMs autonomously coordinate multi-appliance scheduling from natural language requests to device control, achieving optimal scheduling without example demonstrations. A hierarchical architecture combining one orchestrator with three specialist agents uses the ReAct pattern for iterative reasoning, enabling dynamic coordination without hardcoded workflows while integrating Google Calendar for context-aware deadline extraction. Evaluation across three open-source models using real Austrian day-ahead electricity prices reveals substantial capability differences. Llama-3.3-70B successfully coordinates all appliances across all scenarios to match cost-optimal benchmarks computed via mixed-integer linear programming, while other models achieve perfect single-appliance performance but struggle to coordinate all appliances simultaneously. Progressive prompt engineering experiments demonstrate that analytical query handling without explicit guidance remains unreliable despite models' general reasoning capabilities. We open-source the complete system including orchestration logic, agent prompts, tools, and web interfaces to enable reproducibility, extension, and future research.
2025-10-30T15:33:52Z
34 pages, 9 figures. Code available at https://github.com/RedaElMakroum/agentic-ai-hems
Reda El Makroum
Sebastian Zwickl-Bernhard
Lukas Kranzl
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26615v4
SlideAgent: Hierarchical Agentic Framework for Multi-Page Visual Document Understanding
2026-06-05T02:31:19Z
Multi-page visual documents such as manuals, brochures, presentations, and posters convey key information through layout, colors, icons, and cross-slide references. While multimodal large language models (MLLMs) offer opportunities in document understanding, current systems struggle with complex, multi-page visual documents, particularly in fine-grained reasoning over elements and pages. We introduce SlideAgent, a versatile agentic framework for understanding multi-modal, multi-page, and multi-layout documents, especially slide decks. SlideAgent employs specialized agents and decomposes reasoning into three specialized levels--global, page, and element--to construct a structured, query-agnostic representation that captures both overarching themes and detailed visual or textual cues. During inference, SlideAgent selectively activates specialized agents for multi-level reasoning and integrates their outputs into coherent, context-aware answers. Extensive experiments show that SlideAgent significantly improves accuracy over both proprietary (+7.9%) and open-source models (+9.8%).
2025-10-30T15:41:15Z
ACL 2026 Main Conference. https://slideagent.github.io/
Yiqiao Jin
Rachneet Kaur
Zhen Zeng
Sumitra Ganesh
Srijan Kumar
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26641v4
All You Need for Object Detection: From Pixels, Points, and Prompts to Next-Gen Fusion and Multimodal LLMs/VLMs in Autonomous Vehicles
2026-04-09T21:40:47Z
Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) are transforming the future of transportation through advances in intelligent perception, decision-making, and control systems. However, their success is tied to one core capability, reliable object detection in complex and multimodal environments. While recent breakthroughs in Computer Vision (CV) and Artificial Intelligence (AI) have driven remarkable progress, the field still faces a critical challenge as knowledge remains fragmented across multimodal perception, contextual reasoning, and cooperative intelligence. This survey bridges that gap by delivering a forward-looking analysis of object detection in AVs, emphasizing emerging paradigms such as Vision-Language Models (VLMs), Large Language Models (LLMs), and Generative AI rather than re-examining outdated techniques. We begin by systematically reviewing the fundamental spectrum of AV sensors (camera, ultrasonic, LiDAR, and Radar) and their fusion strategies, highlighting not only their capabilities and limitations in dynamic driving environments but also their potential to integrate with recent advances in LLM/VLM-driven perception frameworks. Next, we introduce a structured categorization of AV datasets that moves beyond simple collections, positioning ego-vehicle, infrastructure-based, and cooperative datasets (e.g., V2V, V2I, V2X, I2I), followed by a cross-analysis of data structures and characteristics. Ultimately, we analyze cutting-edge detection methodologies, ranging from 2D and 3D pipelines to hybrid sensor fusion, with particular attention to emerging transformer-driven approaches powered by Vision Transformers (ViTs), Large and Small Language Models (SLMs), and VLMs. By synthesizing these perspectives, our survey delivers a clear roadmap of current capabilities, open challenges, and future opportunities.
2025-10-30T16:08:25Z
Sayed Pedram Haeri Boroujeni
Niloufar Mehrabi
Hazim Alzorgan
Mahlagha Fazeli
Abolfazl Razi
10.1016/j.imavis.2026.105944
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26658v1
The Era of Agentic Organization: Learning to Organize with Language Models
2025-10-30T16:25:10Z
We envision a new era of AI, termed agentic organization, where agents solve complex problems by working collaboratively and concurrently, enabling outcomes beyond individual intelligence. To realize this vision, we introduce asynchronous thinking (AsyncThink) as a new paradigm of reasoning with large language models, which organizes the internal thinking process into concurrently executable structures. Specifically, we propose a thinking protocol where an organizer dynamically assigns sub-queries to workers, merges intermediate knowledge, and produces coherent solutions. More importantly, the thinking structure in this protocol can be further optimized through reinforcement learning. Experiments demonstrate that AsyncThink achieves 28% lower inference latency compared to parallel thinking while improving accuracy on mathematical reasoning. Moreover, AsyncThink generalizes its learned asynchronous thinking capabilities, effectively tackling unseen tasks without additional training.
2025-10-30T16:25:10Z
Zewen Chi
Li Dong
Qingxiu Dong
Yaru Hao
Xun Wu
Shaohan Huang
Furu Wei
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26702v1
Delegated Authorization for Agents Constrained to Semantic Task-to-Scope Matching
2025-10-30T17:07:00Z
Authorizing Large Language Model driven agents to dynamically invoke tools and access protected resources introduces significant risks, since current methods for delegating authorization grant overly broad permissions and give access to tools allowing agents to operate beyond the intended task scope. We introduce and assess a delegated authorization model enabling authorization servers to semantically inspect access requests to protected resources, and issue access tokens constrained to the minimal set of scopes necessary for the agents' assigned tasks. Given the unavailability of datasets centered on delegated authorization flows, particularly including both semantically appropriate and inappropriate scope requests for a given task, we introduce ASTRA, a dataset and data generation pipeline for benchmarking semantic matching between tasks and scopes. Our experiments show both the potential and current limitations of model-based matching, particularly as the number of scopes needed for task completion increases. Our results highlight the need for further research into semantic matching techniques enabling intent-aware authorization for multi-agent and tool-augmented applications, including fine-grained control, such as Task-Based Access Control (TBAC).
2025-10-30T17:07:00Z
Paper page at https://outshift-open.github.io/ASTRA
Majed El Helou
Chiara Troiani
Benjamin Ryder
Jean Diaconu
Hervé Muyal
Marcelo Yannuzzi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26721v2
MaLoRA: Gated Modality LoRA for Key-Space Alignment in Multimodal LLM Fine-Tuning
2026-04-20T17:11:16Z
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) exhibit a pronounced preference for textual inputs when processing vision-language data, limiting their ability to reason effectively from visual evidence. Unlike prior studies that attribute this text bias to external factors such as data imbalance or instruction tuning, we propose that the bias originates from the model's internal architecture. Specifically, we hypothesize that visual key vectors (Visual Keys) are out-of-distribution (OOD) relative to the text key space learned during language-only pretraining. Consequently, these visual keys receive systematically lower similarity scores during attention computation, leading to their under-utilization in the context representation. To validate this hypothesis, we extract key vectors from LLaVA and Qwen2.5-VL and analyze their distributional structures using qualitative (t-SNE) and quantitative (Jensen-Shannon divergence) methods. The results provide direct evidence that visual and textual keys occupy markedly distinct subspaces within the attention space. The inter-modal divergence is statistically significant, exceeding intra-modal variation by several orders of magnitude. These findings reveal that text bias arises from an intrinsic misalignment within the attention key space rather than solely from external data factors.
2025-10-30T17:22:22Z
Xinhan Zheng
Huyu Wu
Xueting Wang
Duo Su
Haiyun Jiang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26752v2
The Oversight Game: Learning to Cooperatively Balance an AI Agent's Safety and Autonomy
2026-02-19T20:18:48Z
As increasingly capable agents are deployed, a central safety challenge is how to retain meaningful human control without modifying the underlying system. We study a minimal control interface in which an agent chooses whether to act autonomously (play) or defer (ask), while a human simultaneously chooses whether to be permissive (trust) or engage in oversight (oversee), and model this interaction as a two-player Markov game. When this game forms a Markov Potential Game, we prove an alignment guarantee: any increase in the agent's utility from acting more autonomously cannot decrease the human's value. This establishes a form of intrinsic alignment where the agent's incentive to seek autonomy is structurally coupled to the human's welfare. Practically, the framework induces a transparent control layer that encourages the agent to defer when risky and act when safe. While we use gridworld simulations to illustrate the emergence of this collaboration, our primary validation involves an agentic tool-use task in which two 30B parameter language models are fine-tuned via independent policy gradient. We demonstrate that even as the agents learn to coordinate on the fly, this framework effectively reduces safety violations in realistic, open-ended environments.
2025-10-30T17:46:49Z
William Overman
Mohsen Bayati
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26782v3
Cloning Deterministic Worlds: The Critical Role of Latent Geometry in Long-Horizon World Models
2026-04-20T20:34:09Z
A world model is an internal model that simulates how the world evolves. Given past observations and actions, it predicts the future physical state of both the embodied agent and its environment. Accurate world models are essential for enabling agents to think, plan, and reason effectively in complex, dynamic settings. However, existing world models often focus on random generation of open worlds, but neglect the need for high-fidelity modeling of deterministic scenarios (such as fixed-map mazes and static space robot navigation). In this work, we take a step toward building a truly accurate world model by addressing a fundamental yet open problem: constructing a model that can fully clone a deterministic 3D world. 1) Through diagnostic experiment, we quantitatively demonstrate that high-fidelity cloning is feasible and the primary bottleneck for long-horizon fidelity is the geometric structure of the latent representation, not the dynamics model itself. 2) Building on this insight, we show that applying temporal contrastive learning principle as a geometric regularization can effectively curate a latent space that better reflects the underlying physical state manifold, demonstrating that contrastive constraints can serve as a powerful inductive bias for stable world modeling; we call this approach Geometrically-Regularized World Models (GRWM). At its core is a lightweight geometric regularization module that can be seamlessly integrated into standard autoencoders, reshaping their latent space to provide a stable foundation for effective dynamics modeling. By focusing on representation quality, GRWM offers a simple yet powerful pipeline for improving world model fidelity.
2025-10-30T17:56:43Z
Zaishuo Xia
Yukuan Lu
Xinyi Li
Yifan Xu
Yubei Chen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.26799v1
Masked Diffusion Captioning for Visual Feature Learning
2025-10-30T17:59:46Z
We learn visual features by captioning images with an image-conditioned masked diffusion language model, a formulation we call masked diffusion captioning (MDC). During training, text tokens in each image-caption pair are masked at a randomly chosen ratio, and a decoder conditioned on visual features is trained to reconstruct the original text. After training, the learned visual features can be applied to downstream vision tasks. Unlike autoregressive captioning, the strength of the visual learning signal in MDC does not depend on each token's position in the sequence, reducing the need for auxiliary objectives. Linear probing experiments across a variety of academic-scale models and datasets show that the learned visual features are competitive with those produced by autoregressive and contrastive approaches.
2025-10-30T17:59:46Z
EMNLP 2025 (Findings). Project page: https://cfeng16.github.io/mdlm4vfl/
Chao Feng
Zihao Wei
Andrew Owens