Delegated Authorization for Agents Constrained to Semantic Task-to-Scope Matching
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I Introduction
II Related Work
II-A LLM-based Tool Selection and Benchmarks
II-B Intent Detection
II-C Delegated Authorization and Access-Control
III Method
III-A Semantic Matching
III-A1 Semantic Similarity Matcher
III-A2 LLM Reasoning Matcher
IV Experimental Evaluation
IV-A Data Generation and Tool Matching Simulation
IV-B Toucan Data Pre-processing and Simulation
IV-C Task-Tool Matching
IV-D Experiments
V Results
V-A Single-Tool Tasks
V-B Multi-Tool Tasks
V-C Matcher Performance Across Task Complexities
VI Discussion and Future Work
VII Conclusion
References
License: CC BY-NC-SA 4.0
arXiv:2510.26702v1 [cs.AI] 30 Oct 2025
Delegated Authorization for Agents Constrained to Semantic Task-to-Scope Matching
Majed El Helou1,
Chiara Troiani1,
Benjamin Ryder1,
Jean Diaconu2,
Hervé Muyal2,
Marcelo Yannuzzi2
Affiliation: 1Equal Contribution, 2Shared Senior Authorship
Affiliation:
Cisco Systems, Switzerland
Email: {melhelou, chtroian, beryder, jdiaconu, hmuyal, mayannuz}@cisco.com
Abstract
Authorizing Large Language Model driven agents to dynamically invoke tools and access protected resources introduces significant risks, since current methods for delegating authorization grant overly broad permissions and give access to tools allowing agents to operate beyond the intended task scope. We introduce and assess a delegated authorization model enabling authorization servers to semantically inspect access requests to protected resources, and issue access tokens constrained to the minimal set of scopes necessary for the agents’ assigned tasks. Given the unavailability of datasets centered on delegated authorization flows, particularly including both semantically appropriate and inappropriate scope requests for a given task, we introduce ASTRA, a dataset and data generation pipeline for benchmarking semantic matching between tasks and scopes. Our experiments show both the potential and current limitations of model-based matching, particularly as the number of scopes needed for task completion increases. Our results highlight the need for further research into semantic matching techniques enabling intent-aware authorization for multi-agent and tool-augmented applications, including fine-grained control, such as Task-Based Access Control (TBAC).
Index Terms: AI, Agents, LLMs, Delegated Authorization, MCP, Tools, Tasks, Scopes, TBAC.
Fig. 1: Delegated authorization with semantic task-to-scope matching counters against attempts to access additional protected resources.
I Introduction
While Large Language Model (LLM)-driven agents substantially expand application capabilities, they also introduce notable risks. For instance, tool calls may be hard-coded within the application, bypassing the model’s decision-making process; alternatively, the LLM may select an inappropriate tool or supply unsuitable parameters. Furthermore, agents might invoke tools that are technically within the allowed permissions, but operate outside the intended scope of the tasks they were asked to perform, thereby creating potential attack vectors for malicious actors.
We illustrate the problem, and show how delegated authorization, and the issuance of access tokens constrained to the outcome of semantic inspection, can mitigate intentional or unintentional requests of additional scopes both in adversarial and trusted scenarios (Figure 1). In the example, either a user or another agent (the subject) may issue a request to the agent at the center (the principal), such as “Ahead of our Q4 traffic spike, enumerate our search services under subscription ‘Contoso-Prod-Sub’ and ensure …”. When the agent receives the input prompt, potentially containing multiple tasks in Natural Language (NL) that require access to various protected resources (e.g., stored in Azure and accessible via tools exposed by an Azure MCP Server), the agent must translate these into structured access requests to the corresponding authorization server.
The flow (A1)-(A4) depicts an example of such translation and its limitations using state-of-the-art authorization servers and current delegated authorization flows. For instance, the agent will parse the input prompt received in step (A1), and it may determine that it requires access to various tools accessible via the MCP server. A delegated authorization process will be triggered by the agent, allowing it to discover the set of scopes available for it from the authorization server. Current authorization servers would typically expose the scopes available for a principal and authorize requests to access tools offered by the MCP server based on statically configured rules, and without having any visibility into the original tasks and/or intents conveyed to the agent in step (A1).
As a result, the agent may request access to protected resources beyond the scope of the commissioned task. In the example, the set of matching scopes (i.e., the ground truth) for the corresponding request would be: [search-service-list, ….]. However, an agent might insert, in step (A2), additional scopes in the access request to the authorization server, such as [search-service-list, subscription-list, ….]. This could occur either unintentionally (e.g., when a trusted agent makes a mistake) or intentionally (e.g., when a rogue agents attempts to inadvertently insert additional scopes in the access request to the authorization server).
If “subscription-list” is within the list of allowable scopes for the agent, the authorization server will grant the authorization, issue an access token in step (A3), which could be used as a bearer token to access the protected resources in Azure in step (A4). This would allow the agent to complete the original request while gaining access to additional protected resources in Azure. This problem is especially concerning when the additional scopes granted enable operations, such as PUT/POST/DELETE. These issues underscore the need for new delegated authorization mechanisms capable of inspecting the original intent carried in step (A1), and the corresponding matching to the scopes requested in step (A2) by the agent.
To address these challenges, we propose a new approach enabling an authorization server to work in tandem with a trusted proxy bound to the agents, and perform semantic inspection and matching of access requests to protected resources with the support of enhanced delegated authorization flows. This approach is depicted in the flow (B1)-(B4) in Figure 1. The original intent is firstly captured by a trusted proxy in step (B1), which is forwarded with additional metadata to the agent in step (B2). In this new model, all delegated authorization flows are proxied, and, even if in step (B3) the agent attempts to request additional scopes to gain access to other protected resources in Azure, we show that the semantic inspection and matching capability within the authorization server can help mitigate such attempts, as shown in step (B4).
We evaluate two initial approaches, namely, a Semantic Similarity Matcher (SemSimM), and an LLM-based Reasoning Matcher (LLM-ResM), with the aim of enabling fine-grained and intent-aware controls, such as Task-Based Access Control (TBAC), and the issuing of access tokens to agents strictly scoped to their assigned tasks.
Furthermore, we introduce a novel dataset and data generation pipeline called ‘‘Authorization with Semantic Task-based Restricted Access’’ (ASTRA)11
1
The ASTRA dataset is publicly available at https://outshift-open.github.io/ASTRA, to benchmark the semantic alignment between tasks and the requested scopes, enabling reproducible and systematic evaluation targeting delegated authorization flows. For instance, the example prompt shown in Figure 1 is available in ASTRA. Through experimental analysis using ASTRA, we show both the potential of semantic approaches and the limitations that arise as tool complexity and scale increase, highlighting key areas for future research.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study to introduce a dataset generation pipeline for benchmarking indirect semantic matching between tasks and scopes, and enhance delegated authorization controls based on such matching.
II Related Work
In this section, we examine the state of the art in LLM-based tool selection, existing benchmarks centered in tool selection, along with mechanisms enabling intent detection, delegated authorization, and access control.
II-A LLM-based Tool Selection and Benchmarks
LLMs have demonstrated strong performance across diverse Natural Language Processing (NLP) tasks, including question answering, text generation, and language comprehension [1]. Beyond their core language capabilities, advances in tool calling have significantly extended their functionality, enabling interaction with external systems and structured data sources. This integration has allowed LLM-based systems to address complex, multi-step, problems by combining multiple, purpose-specific model calls into agent architectures capable of reasoning, performing data retrieval, and decision-making [2, 3].
In a typical tool-calling setup, the application exposes a tool’s name, description, and parameters to the LLM, which then determines, based on conversational context, whether the tool should be invoked [4]. The application executes the tool and returns the result to the model, enabling iterative reasoning and action within a single interaction loop. Applications following this pattern are often referred to as agents, with the simplest forms implementing straightforward tool-use workflows and with more advanced designs incorporating explicit planning and reasoning strategies that coordinate multiple tools over extended task sequences [2, 5, 6, 7].
While tools can be integrated directly into applications at build time, the emergence of the Model Context Protocol (MCP) shifts this responsibility from the agent to an MCP Server, which defines and executes tools independently of the application calling the LLM [8]. MCP Servers may be ran in-memory by the application, hosted locally, co-located with the application, or run remotely. This separation of concerns improves modularity and offers an entry point for delegated, scoped authorization, ensuring agents operate strictly within predefined permissions.
Tool Selection Benchmarks
The shift to MCP Server tools in turn enables the discovery and support of a larger number of tools by an agent, increasing the complexity of the tool selection performed by that agent. After initial benchmarks for evaluating the performance of agents on question answering tasks that indirectly use tools [9, 10], multiple benchmarks emerged to evaluate the accuracy of tool selection in itself. For instance, AgentTuning [11], AgentBench [12], API-Blend [13], or the multi-programming language API Pack [14]. Studies have also shown that fine-tuning on tool-calling could improve the performance of the underlying models [15]. Tool selection benchmarks generally remained focused on specific environments and associated tools that an agent would operate with, rather than an open MCP Server setting.
Agents were also assumed to operate in a one-way independent manner, which, while enabling multi-turn steps by an agent, does not consider a conversational setting. This limitation is addressed in ALMITA [16], which generates a conversational agent dataset with tool calling, albeit with a human in the loop. ALMITA shows a drop in state-of-the-art LLM performance under conversational settings compared with the common single message setting. However, the dataset is focused on customer support, which remains limited. In comparison, Toucan [17] recently introduced a large dataset to tackle the aforementioned limitations in the literature. The dataset contains 1.5 million data samples, covering real-world MCP Servers with associated multi-tool synthetic tasks.
Despite the available benchmarks and datasets, there is a gap in the literature when it comes to data for independently validating LLM task-to-scope matching, where in a realistic setting, we can expect that certain scope choices would not align with the task given to the LLM, i.e., a dataset that includes both appropriate and inappropriate scope choices, and the corresponding tool calls, based on a given task.
II-B Intent Detection
Being able to independently validate the appropriateness of an LLM-based tool choice for a given task touches on the field of intent detection, a cornerstone of task-oriented conversational AI, which has undergone a significant transformation with the advent of LLMs.
Research explores not only traditional intent classification but also more complex challenges, including the detection of Out-of-Scope (OOS) queries, the understanding of implicit intent in multi-turn dialogues, the identification of the right knowledge sources, and APIs and tool calls.
Traditional intent detection systems typically relied on supervised learning approaches or similarity-based algorithms [18, 19]. With their comprehensive understanding of world knowledge, and robust few-shot learning abilities, LLMs present new opportunities for advancing intent detection within task-oriented dialogue systems [20].
II-C Delegated Authorization and Access-Control
Modern authorization systems rest on the use of user accounts, service accounts, and groups, combined with access policies and access control. These systems have evolved to meet the increasing complexity of digital identities, including Non-Human Identities (NHI), and resource management in distributed environments, giving raise to more expressive and context-aware authorization methods through the modeling of dynamic relationships between entities, such as Google’s Zanzibar [21].
Delegated authorization protocols, most prominently OAuth 2.0 [22], its extensions, and OAuth 2.1 [23] have become the standard for granting applications limited access to protected resources on behalf of a principal. Recent advances, such as RFC 9728 “Protected Resource Metadata” [24], RFC 8414 “Authorization Server Metadata” [25], and RFC 7591 “Dynamic Client Registration” [26], have further enhanced the flexibility and interoperability of OAuth-based systems, allowing dynamic discovery of endpoints and scopes, and enabling on-the-fly client registration.
However, traditional delegated authorization flows reveal critical limitations when applied to applications utilizing LLM-based agents, where these agents autonomously interpret and act on unstructured, Natural Language (NL) inputs. In such scenarios, current authorization servers are not equipped to process or contextualize the original user intent encapsulated in NL prompts. Instead, they operate solely on the explicit access requests received from the agent, requests that may diverge, intentionally or otherwise, from the user’s original intentions. This creates a significant trust gap, as authorization servers can only adjudicate what the agent requests, not what the task issuer truly needs. Additional information about this gap and current delegated authorization flows is provided in the appendix.
This limitation is not merely a technical gap, but rather a fundamental challenge that necessitates a new delegated authorization model for agent-based applications. Even if authorization servers were capable of ingesting the original NL prompt, current access control techniques are designed neither to infer intent from ambiguous or context-rich language, nor to apply access control at the level of semantic meaning.
Efforts to mitigate these risks include defining policies encompassing all possible scopes an agent might require, thus bounding the set of actions an agent can perform if authorized. While this restricts the blast radius of agent actions, it does neither eliminate the risk, as it does not bridge the gap between the input intent and the access request intent, nor resolve ambiguities or intent deviations inherent to NL inputs. Furthermore, even a modest number of scopes results in a combinatorial explosion of possible permissions, complicating risk assessment and policy management.
Complementary approaches, such as Okta’s Cross Application Access protocol (XAA) [27], propose extending OAuth to enable dynamic, cryptographically-bound associations among users, agents, and resource applications. XAA introduces constructs such as the JWT Authorization Grant (ID-JAG), providing extended visibility and control to the Identity Provider (IdP) and authorization server beyond traditional Single Sign-On (SSO) boundaries. Despite these advances, the core limitations persist, since XAA does not address the challenge of aligning agent-generated access requests with the original intent received by the agent, particularly, in the presence of ambiguous NL prompts.
III Method
To address the disconnect between the subject’s input intent and resulting principal’s access requests, we propose and evaluate a semantic, task-centric authorization model that combines an authorization server with a trusted proxy. Unlike traditional access control models that rely on predefined roles, attributes, or persistent relationships, our approach enables real-time access decisions that are closely aligned with the specific execution context of each subject’s request. This method allows for more granular and transient access policies, tailored to the needs of rapidly evolving agentic workflows.
As shown in Figure 2, a subject issues a natural language request, potentially comprising multiple tasks, via a proxy trusted by the authorization server. This proxy captures the full prompt carrying the subject’s intent along with contextual metadata. This information is securely relayed to both the principal and the AuthZ Server during a delegated authorization flow, and all authorization requests from the principal to the AuthZ Server are communicated exclusively via the trusted proxy (additional details on current delegated authorization flows and the approach described herein are provided in the appendix). The principal, in turn, makes tool or resource requests directly to an MCP Server, which has access to protected resources (e.g., APIs or databases accessible via specific query languages (QL)).
Fig. 2: Proxied delegated authorization enabling trusted semantic matching between task and scope requests.
The AuthZ Server utilizes an NLP semantic matching module (supported by a trusted LLM) to interpret both the natural language task description and the specifics of the requested tool or resource (including tool names and descriptions in the case of MCP servers), and match the access requests that the principal makes against the subject’s original intent. This semantic comparison enables the AuthZ Server to grant permissions only for the scope and duration necessary to fulfill the subject’s intended task. Existing policy configurations may be referenced during this process to inform or constrain access decisions. This just-in-time, least-privilege mechanism aims to grant access that is both granular and ephemeral: permissions are provisioned dynamically and automatically revoked upon task completion, significantly mitigating the risks associated with privilege escalation or resource overreach, even if a principal attempts to request additional or unrelated scopes.
To address the challenge of scope management at scale, particularly for large organizations where the number of applications and scopes grows combinatorially, our proposed architecture segments the authorization infrastructure into multiple, lightweight virtualized AuthZ servers. Each agentic application can be provisioned with its own dedicated AuthZ instance, enabling independent semantic policy rules and minimizing scope bloat. This segmentation not only improves manageability and policy clarity, but also supports horizontal scaling as the number of agentic workflows grows. The reduction and isolation of available scopes and tools per AuthZ instance further constrain the potential blast radius of any given agent-based application.
However, it is important to note that while traditional access control models tend to over-scope agents by granting broad, persistent permissions, this approach faces the opposite risk: under-scoping. Restricting permissions strictly to those inferred as necessary for the immediate task can inadvertently block agents from accessing additional tools or resources required for successful execution.
Fig. 3: Semantic task-to-scope matching using SemSimM and LLM-ResM in the AuthZ server.
III-A Semantic Matching
The practical effectiveness of the proposed approach, therefore, hinges on the choice of a semantic technique for aligning tasks and permissions, with different strategies leading to varying degrees of over- or under-scoping, directly impacting both security and agent utility. In order to assess the impact that different underlying techniques can have when enabling fine-grained and intent-aware controls, such as TBAC, we developed and compared the following two approaches within the AuthZ Server NLP semantic matching module described above for task to scope semantic matching.
III-A1 Semantic Similarity Matcher
The Semantic Similarity Matcher (SemSimM), represented within the purple block in Figure 3, leverages language model embeddings to assess the semantic alignment between the task and the requested tool. Upon receiving a tool request, a trusted language model generates an idealized description of the tool that would best satisfy the given task [28]. This generated description and the descriptions of all available tools are encoded into a semantic vector space using embeddings. The matcher calculates the semantic similarity between the ideal tool description and each available tool’s description. If the most similar tool matches the requested tool above a predefined similarity threshold, the matcher predicts that the tool is appropriate for the task; otherwise, it predicts that it is not appropriate.
This approach may present challenges in environments with extensive tool registries. Additionally, it is not well-suited for tasks that require the coordinated use of multiple tools, since it currently evaluates tool appropriateness in isolation.
III-A2 LLM Reasoning Matcher
The LLM Reasoning Matcher (LLM-ResM), represented within the blue block in Figure 3, evaluates tool requests based exclusively on the task context and the name and description of the requested tools, without requiring information about the full set of available tools. It adopts a direct, reasoning-oriented strategy: a trusted large language model is prompted with both the task and the requested tool, and asked explicitly whether the tool is suitable for fulfilling the task. The model leverages its understanding and contextual knowledge to provide a judgment, a structured positive or negative flag, regarding the appropriateness of the request.
A key strength of this approach is its scalability, as the evaluation pertains only to the specific tool-task pair and does not require scanning the entire tool registry. Moreover, language models can capture nuanced reasoning and adapt to a wide variety of tasks and tool descriptions, provided that prompt engineering is carefully managed.
IV Experimental Evaluation
To explore the tradeoff between over- and under-scoping, we experiment with two distinct semantic approaches for intent extraction and matching within the TBAC framework. The following section presents our experimental methodology and evaluates the impact of these strategies. First, we present our synthetic data generation pipeline for task creation, and our tool matching simulation for creating incorrectly matched tool requests. We then present our data pre-processing on the Toucan [17] dataset and run our simulation on it. We present two preliminary versions of a task-tool matcher and evaluate them on both our dataset and public data.
IV-A Data Generation and Tool Matching Simulation
Based on the unavailability of a dataset that includes both appropriate and inappropriate tool calls for a given task, in this work we generate a dataset similar to Toucan using real-world MCP servers to create multi-tool tasks, and also curate a subset of Toucan for comparison. In our dataset, we simulate incorrect matches with two sampling approaches, and then recreate our simulation on top of Toucan data.
To create our underlying dataset of agentic tasks and associated MCP Server tools, we begin by manually curating a set of 12 high-quality enterprise use-case public MCP Servers. The server sizes range from the Wikipedia MCP with 10 tools to the GitHub MCP with 90 tools, at the time of writing. We run an MCP discovery script that collects all MCP metadata, including for example the tool names, descriptions, and arguments.
For synthesizing agentic tasks, we traverse the extracted MCP Servers and select from every server a set of NN tools (N∈[1,2,3]N\in[1,2,3]), sampled uniformly at random without replacement from that MCP to preserve semantic coherence. We limit N≤3N\leq 3 in our dataset and experiments, as we discover heuristically that beyond N=4N=4 the task realism drops (we note that Toucan concurrently also limited the number of tools per task to N≤3N\leq 3). Once the sets of target tools are created, spanning all MCP Server tools for full coverage, we synthetically generate MM tasks per tool set using an LLM (OpenAI GPT-4o). The MM tasks are generated in parallel using structured outputs, with an instruction for the LLM to have diversity across the MM different tasks. The LLM is provided with the tool name, and a modified version of the tool description, for each of the NN tools. We modify tool descriptions to remove function argument details from them, which appear in some MCP Servers. This prevents biasing the LLM and enables us to obtain more realistic tasks, rather than overly specific tasks that directly match with the exact arguments of the tool. In addition, we provide a system prompt to encourage the LLM to generate tasks that do not directly ask for the tools, but instead that are realistic and indirectly require the tools in order to carry them out. We thus obtain, by covering each one of our MCP tools, 352×M352\times M synthetic tool-requiring tasks for each N∈[1,2,3]N\in[1,2,3], with M=3M=3 in our dataset and experiments. We provide all of our system prompts in the appendix.
Task-tool matching requires, beyond task data necessitating tool calls, a simulated matching between tasks and both correct and incorrect tool requests. We propose two sampling approaches for incorrect tool matching: wrong and null matches. Wrong matches are tool requests simulated from the same MCP Server as the correct tool, indicating a certain degree of semantic similarity. Null matches represent a tool request with significant deviation, possibly representing a hallucination, which we simulate by sampling tools from an entirely different MCP Server. In either case, for N≥2N\geq 2 we sample wrong and null matches with no overlap with the correct matches. The simulation setup takes as input the desired number of correct matches taken from our dataset, and the ratio of wrong and null matches relative to the number of correct matches. Our simulation also allows as input a desired subset of MCP Servers, to enable the generation of fully independent validation and test sets for instance.
IV-B Toucan Data Pre-processing and Simulation
We process data samples from the Toucan dataset to have an additional comparison point in our experimental evaluation. Our data pre-processing of Toucan serves to transform its data formats to match our simulation pipeline in order to simulate matches on top of the raw dataset, and also to clean up certain aspects from the dataset as described in the following.
We consider the Toucan data generated using the GPT-OSS-120B model. We begin by collecting the MCP Servers and tools associated with the data subset. We run the collection while additionally filtering out MCP Servers that are not entirely in English (including tool names and descriptions) or tools that have empty description fields, both for consistency with our dataset and for data quality control. More importantly, we find that across the MCP Servers used in Toucan, there exists tool redundancy, meaning multiple MCP Servers having the exact same tools. We filter out this redundancy, as it can break task-tool matching when simulating incorrect tool requests. In addition, we retain tasks that request tools from unique MCP Servers, for the realism of the tasks. To enable the simulation of wrong matches while getting rid of tool-limited servers, we also filter out any MCP Servers that do not contain at least 2×N2\times N tools. For null matches, MCP Server selection happens adaptively in our simulator for each task based on its own number of associated tools. Once our filtering is complete, we are left with 118118 valid MCP Servers, and finally we transform the data to match the format of our pipeline and our simulator, resulting in 10561056 processed tasks for each N∈[1,2,3]N\in[1,2,3].
IV-C Task-Tool Matching
In the context of agentic applications, robust access control mechanisms are essential to prevent unauthorized or unnecessary tool usage. The task-tool matching problem centers on determining whether a tool requested by an application is indeed necessary and appropriate for fulfilling a specific input task. The overarching goal is to grant access only to those tools that are strictly required to accomplish the task at hand, thereby minimizing the attack surface and potential for misuse. This matching process must be carried out dynamically, i.e., each time a tool call is triggered, ensuring continuous and context-aware enforcement.
A key aspect of the matching challenge lies in the granularity and complexity of tool usage. While single-tool requests are relatively straightforward to validate, scenarios involving multi-tool workflows introduce additional complexity. Here, the matcher must consider not only the appropriateness of individual tools but also their potential interdependencies and the necessity of composite tool usage. This distinction highlights the need for scalable and intelligent matching strategies capable of handling both simple and complex tool invocation patterns.
To address the task-tool matching problem, we conduct two preliminary experiments for SemSimM and LLM-ResM. Each matcher leverages trusted language model technology but differs fundamentally in its matching mechanism and scalability characteristics. These initial experiments are intended to explore the problem space and to highlight both the challenges and limitations inherent to each approach.
IV-D Experiments
Our experiments were conducted under conditions of dynamic tool availability, emulating realistic agentic application environments in which the set of accessible tools may vary over time. Model inferences and embedding computations were performed on demand for each tool invocation requested by the application, thereby enabling fine-grained, tool-level access control. For the core components, we used OpenAI GPT-4o as the LLM (temperature=0.0) and OpenAI text-embedding-3-large for all embedding-based computations [29].
To ensure a robust evaluation, the data was partitioned into a validation and test splits, with no overlap in tools or MCP-Servers between the two sets, and a ratio of 0.8 wrong matches and 0.2 null matches. For what concerns evaluation, wrong and null matches are both considered incorrect tool matches. The validation set was used to calibrate the similarity threshold for the Semantic Similarity matcher and to iteratively engineer prompts for both the Semantic Similarity and Language Model Reasoning matchers.
Both methods were evaluated on tasks requiring a single tool. For tasks involving multiple tools, only the Language Model Reasoning matcher was applied, as the Semantic Similarity matcher is limited to single-tool scenarios. Evaluations were conducted on both our generated dataset and the processed subset of the publicly available Toucan dataset.
V Results
We report the effectiveness of the SemSimM and LLM-ResM methods on both the generated and public datasets. Our evaluation focuses on two scenarios: tasks requiring a single tool and those involving multiple tools. Performance is measured using standard classification metrics, and we analyze how system behavior varies as task complexity increases.
V-A Single-Tool Tasks
Table I summarizes the results for single-tool scenarios. The LLM-ResM consistently outperforms SemSimM across all datasets, achieving higher accuracy, recall, and F1 scores. SemSim presents a substantially lower recall, indicating a tendency to reject valid tool requests.
Matcher
Data
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1
SemSimM
Val.
0.81
1.00
0.55
0.71
SemSimM
Test
0.77
0.99
0.55
0.71
SemSimM
Toucan
0.86
0.92
0.78
0.85
LLM-ResM
Val.
0.96
0.93
0.98
0.96
LLM-ResM
Test
0.96
0.93
0.99
0.96
LLM-ResM
Toucan
0.90
0.84
1.00
0.91
TABLE I: Performance of Semantic Similarity (SemSimM) and LLM Reasoning (LLM-ResM) matchers on tasks requiring a single tool.
V-B Multi-Tool Tasks
For tasks involving multiple tools, evaluation was limited to the LLM-ResM matcher.
The matching process is performed independently for each tool requested within a task; for example, a task requiring two tools undergoes two separate matching steps: once for requested tool 1 and again for requested tool 2.
Table II shows LLM-ResM matcher performances across both our dataset and on Toucan.
As expected, assessing the appropriateness of a tool becomes more challenging as task complexity increases; specifically, the matcher performs better on tasks requiring two tools than on those requiring three tools. The most affected metric is recall, indicating that the matcher is more likely to reject valid tool requests in more complex scenarios. Overall, the performance of the LLM-ResM is generally similar between our dataset and Toucan, suggesting consistent behavior across different sources. The main observed difference lies in recall for tasks that require three tools: on Toucan, recall is higher by 29 percentage points compared to our dataset. This performance gap can be attributed to differences in tool usage patterns across the datasets. Specifically, our data generation process yields tasks where tool usage is more implicit, requiring the classifier to infer the appropriate tools from less direct cues. In contrast, the public dataset predominantly features tasks with more explicit tool usage, often presented as a list of actions where each action corresponds clearly to a specific tool (examples are provided in the appendix).
# Tools
Data
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1
2
Val.
0.88
0.90
0.85
0.88
2
Test
0.86
0.89
0.82
0.85
2
Toucan
0.82
0.79
0.88
0.83
3
Val.
0.73
0.81
0.61
0.70
3
Test
0.72
0.81
0.57
0.67
3
Toucan
0.82
0.80
0.86
0.83
TABLE II: Performance of LLM-Reasoning Matcher (LLM-ResM) on tasks requiring more than one tool.
V-C Matcher Performance Across Task Complexities
Effective authorization depends on carefully balancing over-scoping and under-scoping: over-scoping introduces security risks by granting excessive permissions, while under-scoping can hinder task completion and reduce usability by restricting necessary access. This balance becomes particularly challenging when tasks require multiple tools, as the overall outcome depends on the combined effect of matcher decisions, as illustrated on the left side of Figure 3.
We analyzed this cumulative impact for LLM-ResM across tasks of varying complexity, defined by the number of required tools (#tools) and the dataset used (Test split and Toucan). Figure 4 demonstrates the trade-off between over-scoping (reflected by the False Positive Rate) and under-scoping (reflected by the False Negative Rate). Ideally, a matcher would avoid both over-scoping and under-scoping—never granting access to unnecessary tools (zero false positives) and always granting access to the required tools (zero false negatives). However, in practice, it is not possible to achieve both simultaneously, so a balance must be struck between the two.
Our primary objective is to minimize over-scoping, i.e., to reduce the false positive rate. Experimental results show that as task complexity increases (from one to three required tools), under-scoping becomes more significant, with the false negative rate reaching 0.78 on the three-tool dataset. This decline in performance is influenced by the inherent difficulty of the task, the accuracy of the matcher, and the clarity and completeness of tool descriptions.
Fig. 4: Trade off between under-scoping and over-scoping for tasks requiring one, two or three tools across both our dataset and Toucan dataset.
VI Discussion and Future Work
There are several avenues for extending the experimental facets of the work presented here. Semantic task-tool matching could be expanded to include multi-turn conversational contexts and a greater number of tools per task (four or more), which might surface more complex scope determination challenges.
Data generation could be further diversified through the incorporation of additional MCP Servers.
Another interesting exploration avenue would also be to study the effect of replacing the current uniform non-match selection with more deliberate or semantically informed approaches that may mimic adversarial agents.
These options represent opportunities to develop more robust matching methods. With regards to scale and performance, it would be interesting for future work to explore and develop lighter weight NLP techniques and fine-tune smaller language models for task-tool matching, rather than relying on larger generalist proprietary models.
When considering agent-based applications, the conventional authorization models tend to over-scope permissions, granting access to a broader set of resources and tools than is necessary for a specific task. In contrast, the approach presented seeks to restrict an agent’s scope to only the permissions required for the task at hand. We note that this, however, introduces a different risk: if the scope determination process is insufficiently accurate, the agent may be denied access to tools essential for a task’s completion. Such under-scoping can hinder, stall, or cause the failure of an application’s execution. In the best-case scenario, the assigned scope precisely matches the ideal minimum task scope, avoiding both over- and under-granting. The techniques and experiments presented in this work aim to advance the ability to reliably determine these minimal scopes. However, accuracy and performance may degrade as the number of protected resources or available tools increases, and additional research into this relationship is needed.
Finally, applying delegated authorization in this way across chains of agents demands mechanisms for preserving requester context and enforcing appropriate scopes at multiple points within the delegation chain. Addressing these challenges offers promising directions for future work toward achieving robust, fine-grained, and reliable task-based authorization in agent-driven systems.
VII Conclusion
In conclusion, the work at hand has introduced a next-generation authorization architecture for LLM-driven agentic applications, combining semantic matching with delegated authorization enabling agents to obtain only the minimally necessary, contextually relevant permissions for their assigned tasks. By moving beyond traditional coarse-grained methods, our approach helps mitigate the risk of granting overly broad access and reduces the likelihood of agents operating outside their intended scope.
To address the lack of resources for benchmarking task to tool matching within delegated authorization contexts, we developed ASTRA, a systematic dataset generation pipeline and open-source dataset for evaluating semantic alignment between tasks and access scopes. Our experimental results show that LLM-based semantic matchers offer promise for constraining agent permissions and improving security. However, as task complexity and the number of required scopes increase, the challenge of balancing over-scoping and under-scoping becomes more pronounced, directly influencing both agent usability and security.
While our approach highlights the potential of semantic, intent-aware authorization, including fine-grained models such as TBAC, current methods still face limitations in accuracy and scalability, especially in complex, multi-tool scenarios. Future research should focus on advancing task-tool alignment techniques, supporting multi-turn and multi-agent workflows, and integrating the metadata needed for delegated authorization with semantic matching into widely used authorization protocols. Addressing these challenges will be key to enabling robust, fine-grained authorization for the safe deployment of tool-augmented, agentic applications.
Acknowledgment
The authors would like to thank Mohamed Tahar Kedjour, Corentin Passeron, Rafael Silva, and other colleagues within Outshift by Cisco [30], Cisco’s incubation engine, for their valuable contributions in the areas of identity and verifiable credentials for agents, MCP servers, enhanced delegated authorization flows, and TBAC. We would also like to thank the Linux Foundation AGNTCY project [31] and the Linux Foundation community, for ongoing discussions that inspired this paper, and the first open source reference implementation of Tool-based Access Control, a precursor for Task-based Access Control [32, 33].
References
[1]
T. B. Brown, B. Mann, N. Ryder, M. Subbiah, J. Kaplan, P. Dhariwal, A. Neelakantan, P. Shyam, G. Sastry, A. Askell, S. Agarwal, A. Herbert-Voss, G. Krueger, T. Henighan, R. Child, A. Ramesh, D. M. Ziegler, J. Wu, C. Winter, C. Hesse, M. Chen, E. Sigler, M. Litwin, S. Gray, B. Chess, J. Clark, C. Berner, S. McCandlish, A. Radford, I. Sutskever, and D. Amodei, “Language models are few-shot learners,” 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2005.14165
[2]
S. Yao, J. Zhao, D. Yu, N. Du, I. Shafran, K. Narasimhan, and Y. Cao, “ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629
[3]
T. Schick, J. Dwivedi-Yu, R. Dessì, R. Raileanu, M. Lomeli, L. Zettlemoyer, N. Cancedda, and T. Scialom, “Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to use tools,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761
[4]
OpenAI, “Function calling,” https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/function-calling, 2025.
[5]
L. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Lan, Z. Hu, Y. Lan, R. K.-W. Lee, and E.-P. Lim, “Plan-and-solve prompting: Improving zero-shot chain-of-thought reasoning by large language models,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.04091
[6]
B. Xu, Z. Peng, B. Lei, S. Mukherjee, Y. Liu, and D. Xu, “ReWOO: Decoupling reasoning from observations for efficient augmented language models,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.18323
[7]
X. Liu, H. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Xu, X. Lei, H. Lai, Y. Gu, H. Ding, K. Men, K. Yang, S. Zhang, X. Deng, A. Zeng, Z. Du, C. Zhang, S. Shen, T. Zhang, Y. Su, H. Sun, M. Huang, Y. Dong, and J. Tang, “AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as agents,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2308.03688
[8]
MCP, “Model Context Protocol,” https://modelcontextprotocol.io, 2025.
[9]
Y. Zhuang, Y. Yu, K. Wang, H. Sun, and C. Zhang, “ToolQA: A dataset for LLM question answering with external tools,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, pp. 50 117–50 143, 2023.
[10]
G. Mialon, C. Fourrier, C. Swift, T. Wolf, Y. LeCun, and T. Scialom, “GAIA: a benchmark for general AI assistants,” arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2311, 2023.
[11]
A. Zeng, M. Liu, R. Lu, B. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Dong, and J. Tang, “AgentTuning: Enabling generalized agent abilities for LLMs,” in Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics ACL, 2024, pp. 3053–3077.
[12]
X. Liu, H. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Xu, X. Lei, H. Lai, Y. Gu, H. Ding, K. Men, K. Yang et al., “AgentBench: Evaluating LLMs as agents,” arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2308, 2023.
[13]
K. Basu, I. Abdelaziz, S. Chaudhury, S. Dan, M. Crouse, A. Munawar, S. Kumaravel, V. Muthusamy, P. Kapanipathi, and L. A. Lastras, “API-Blend: A comprehensive corpora for training and benchmarking API LLMs, 2024,” URL https://arxiv. org/abs/2402.15491.
[14]
Z. Guo, A. M. Soria, W. Sun, Y. Shen, and R. Panda, “API Pack: A massive multi-programming language dataset for API call generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09615, 2024.
[15]
S. G. Patil, T. Zhang, X. Wang, and J. E. Gonzalez, “Gorilla: Large Language Model Connected with Massive APIs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.15334, 2023.
[16]
S. Arcadinho, D. Aparício, and M. Almeida, “Automated test generation to evaluate tool-augmented LLMs as conversational AI agents,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.15934, 2024.
[17]
Z. Xu, A. M. Soria, S. Tan, A. Roy, A. S. Agrawal, R. Poovendran, and R. Panda, “Toucan: Synthesizing 1.5 M tool-agentic data from real-world MCP environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.01179, 2025.
[18]
H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L.-M. Zhan, J. Chen, G. Shi, A. Y. S. Lam, and X.-M. Wu, “Effectiveness of pre-training for few-shot intent classification,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2109.05782
[19]
T. Zhang, A. Norouzian, A. Mohan, and F. Ducatelle, “A new approach for fine-tuning sentence transformers for intent classification and out-of-scope detection tasks,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.13649
[20]
G. Arora, S. Jain, and S. Merugu, “Intent detection in the age of LLMs,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.01627
[21]
R. Pang, S. Joglekar, B. O’Neill et al., “Zanzibar: Google’s consistent, global authorization system,” in USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC), Renton, WA, 2019.
[22]
D. Hardt, “The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework (RFC 6749),” https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc6749, Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), 2012.
[23]
D. Hardt, A. Parecki, and T. Lodderstedt, “Draft: OAuth 2.1 Authorization Framework,” https://oauth.net/2.1/, 2025, work in progress, IETF Internet-Draft: draft-ietf-oauth-v2-1.
[24]
T. Lodderstedt, B. Campbell, and M. Jones, “OAuth 2.0 Protected Resource Metadata,” Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), RFC 9728, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc9728
[25]
M. Jones, B. Campbell, and C. Mortimore, “OAuth 2.0 Authorization Server Metadata,” Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), RFC 8414, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc8414
[26]
M. Jones, D. Hardt, and D. Recordon, “OAuth 2.0 Dynamic Client Registration Protocol,” Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF), RFC 7591, 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/rfc/rfc7591
[27]
S. Pathan, “Build Secure Agent-to-App Connections with Cross App Access (XAA),” https://developer.okta.com/blog/2025/09/03/cross-app-access, Okta, 2025.
[28]
X. Fei, X. Zheng, and H. Feng, “MCP-Zero: Active Tool Discovery for Autonomous LLM Agents,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2506.01056
[29]
OpenAI, “GPT-4 Technical Report,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.08774
[30]
Outshift by Cisco, “Outshift by Cisco,” https://outshift.cisco.com, 2025.
[31]
AGNTCY - Linux Foundation, “AGNTCY: Building infrastructure for the internet of agents,” https://agntcy.org, 2025.
[32]
“AGNTCY Identity Service,” https://github.com/agntcy/identity-service, 2025.
[33]
Cisco Systems, “Running instance of the Agent Identity Service, powered by AGNTCY,” https://agent-identity.outshift.com/welcome, 2025.
[34]
N. Sakimura, J. Bradley, M. Jones, B. de Medeiros, and C. Mortimore, “Openid connect core 1.0 incorporating errata set 2,” https://openid.net/specs/openid-connect-core-1_0.html, OpenID Foundation, 2014.
[35]
B. Campbell, C. Mortimore, and M. B. Jones, “Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) 2.0 Profile for OAuth 2.0 Client Authentication and Authorization Grants,” RFC 7522, May 2015. [Online]. Available: https://www.rfc-editor.org/info/rfc7522
Appendix A - Delegated Authorization Background and Limitations
Delegated authorization is one of the key pillars in state-of-the art Identity and Access Management (IAM) systems, allowing a subject (e.g., a user or an agent) to delegate and grant access to one or more protected resources to a third-party (e.g., a second subject, such as a system or another agent), without requiring the first subject to reveal or share its credentials with the second subject. Various standardized protocols enable today the secure delegation of access grants across subjects of different nature, including OAuth 2.0 [22], OAuth 2.1 [23], as well as the use of authentication methods during delegated authorization flows, including protocols such as OpenID Connect (OIDC) [34], and Security Assertion Markup Language (SAML) [35].
A representative example of a state-of-the-art delegated authorization flow supported by OAuth 2.X (i.e., 2.0 or 2.1) is shown in Figure 5. This flow is consistent with the steps (A1)-(A4) depicted in Figure 1, which could be broken down into the following steps:
1.
A User or an Agent may issue a prompt requesting the Agent / MCP Client to perform a certain job, which may entail one or more tasks to be executed by the Agent.
2.
The Agent / MCP Client may already have an MCP connection established with an MCP Server, which may expose various tools enabling access to one or more protected resources. Upon receiving the request in step (1), the Agent / MCP Client may identify the need to call one or more tools offered by the MCP Server (e.g., to access data stored in a protected resource). To this end, the Agent / MCP Client may start a resource request without having a valid access token yet.
3.
The resource server responds with a WWW-Authenticate header including the URL of the protected resource identifier and metadata following RFC 9728 OAuth Protected Resource Metadata [24]. An example response could be:
HTTP / 1.1 401 Unauthorized
WWW-Authenticate: Bearer resource_metadata ="https://resource.example.com/.well- known/oauth-protected-resource"
4.
The Agent / MCP Client now fetches the protected resource metadata using the well-known URL provided in step (3) above. For instance, the metadata consumer (i.e., the MCP Client) could make the following request when the resource identifier is https://resource.example.com/resource1:
GET /.well-known/oauth-protected-resource/resource1 HTTP/1.1
Host: resource.example.com
where the use of path components enables the capacity to support multiple resources per resource server.
5.
The resource server may respond with the protected resource metadata according to the example below. For instance, the response may include one or more authorization servers, such as “https://as1.example.com” “https://as2.example.net”], the bearer methods supported, such as [“header”, “body”], and the scopes supported, e.g., [“scope1”, “scope7”, “scope19”].
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
{
"resource":
"https://resource.example.com/resource1",
"authorization_servers":
["https://as1.example.com",
"https://as2.example.net"],
"bearer_methods_supported":
["header", "body"],
"scopes_supported":
["scope1", "scope7", "scope19"],
"resource_documentation":
"https://resource.example.com/resource1/resource_documentation.html"
}
It is worth noting that, the set of preconfigured scopes supported by the one or more authorization servers might be sent back as part of the response to the Agent / MCP Client in this step. While this is not mandatory, it is a recommended field in RFC 9728 [24].
6.
The Agent / MCP Client validates the protected resource metadata, and builds the authorization server metadata URL from an issuer identifier in the resource metadata, according to RFC 8414 [25]. This RFC defines a metadata format that an OAuth client can use to obtain the information needed to interact with an OAuth authorization server, such as its endpoint locations, and the authorization server capabilities. This approach targeted to generalize the metadata format defined by “OpenID Connect Discovery 1.0”, in a way that remained compatible with OpenID Connect Discovery, while being applicable to a wider set of OAuth 2.0 use cases. Based on this, the Agent / MCP Server makes a request to fetch the authorization server metadata. To this end, it uses another well-known URL, in this case, the one for the authorization server identified and/or selected from the ones obtained in step (5).
7.
The authorization server responds with the authorization server metadata document, according to RFC 8414. An example of such response is given below:
HTTP/1.1 200 OK
Content-Type: application/json
{
"issuer":
"https://server.example.com",
"authorization_endpoint":
"https://server.example.com/authorize",
"token_endpoint":
"https://server.example.com/token",
"token_endpoint_auth_methods_supported":
["client_secret_basic", "private_key_jwt"],
"token_endpoint_auth_signing_alg_values_supported":
["RS256", "ES256"],
"userinfo_endpoint":
"https://server.example.com/userinfo",
"jwks_uri":
"https://server.example.com/jwks.json",
"registration_endpoint":
"https://server.example.com/register",
"scopes_supported":
["scope1", "scope7", "scope19"],
"response_types_supported":
["code", "code token"],
"service_documentation":
"http://server.example.com/service_documentation.html",
"ui_locales_supported":
["en-US", "en-GB", "en-CA", "fr-FR", "fr-CA"]
}
Note that the set of preconfigured scopes supported by the authorization server might also be sent back to the Agent / MCP Client in this step. Once again, while this is not mandatory, it is a recommended field in RFC 8414 [25]. Moreover, steps (6) and (7) may not explicitly carry information about the protected resource. It is up to the Agent / MCP Client to convey such information to the Server in step (8). Indeed, in various implementations supporting delegated authorization, the client (i.e., the Agent / MCP Client) would typically make an access request to the authorization server, in step (8), conveying the intended scopes granting access to specific protected resources.
8.
The Agent / MCP Client now triggers the authorization request carrying the intended scopes for which the access is required, and a Proof Key for Code Exchange (PKCE) code_challenge along with the corresponding hashing method that was used to compute the code_challenge (e.g., S256). PKCE was introduced as a security extension to OAuth 2.0, and it is mandatory in OAuth 2.1. The objective in PKCE is to protect clients against interception attacks targeting the authorization code. More specifically, if steps (8) and (9) are successful, then an access code would be granted to the Agent / MCP Client. Such access code needs to be exchanged by the Agent / MCP Server for an access token (e.g., a bearer token enabling access to a protected resource via the MCP server, without requiring this latter to initiate a token introspection flow). The role of PKCE is to protect such token exchange, and reduce the risk that an attacker intercepts the authorization code and attempts to exchange it for an access token.
In a nutshell, PKCE works as follows. The client generates a code_verifier (e.g., in the form of a high-entropy cryptographic random string). Such code_verifier is hashed by the client, which results in the code_challenge sent by the Agent / MCP Client in step (8) to the authorization server.
The most important observation is that, at this stage, the information conveyed to the authorization server would typically comprise one or more scopes, the PKCE challenge, and the hashing method used, but clearly, it won’t contain any information about the tasks originally requested to the Agent / MCP Client in step (1).
9.
The authorization server would inspect the request and apply a set of preconfigured access policies.
10.
If the access policy permits the access of the Agent / MCP Client, the authorization server responds with an authorization code as part of step 10(a).
In order to redeem this access code, the Agent / MCP Client must present the original code_verifier. By using the code_challenge and method received in step (8), the server can now compute the hash of the code_verifier and compare it with the code_challenge previously received. The authorization server will issue and access token to the Agent / MCP Client, if, and only if, the hashes match. This approach increases the complexity to conduct attacks targeting the interception of access codes. Note that, while the code_challenge is sent to the authorization server using front-channel communications (i.e., through the public channel), the PKCE code_verifier is never exposed on the public channel, and it is only transmitted over a secure, direct back-channel connection. Hence, an attacker wouldn’t have access to the code_verifier through the public channel, making the attack much harder to succeed.
Once the exchange is completed, the authorization server issues and returns an access token to the Agent / MCP Client. The Agent / MCP Client can now repeat the resource request performed in step (2), but this time presenting the newly obtained and valid access token. The resource server may now return the requested protected resource.
11.
A final response may now be returned to the User / Agent.
As highlighted in steps (1), (8), and (9) in Figure 5, existing delegated access solutions, such as OIDC/OAuth2.X fail to meet the needs of Agentic Apps, since the access request made by the agent in step (8), and analyzed by the authorization server in step (9), not only is disconnected from the intent conveyed by the User / Agent in step (1) but also suffers from overly permissive and static delegations, which creates substantial risk as these issues can be exploited in numerous ways.
We proceed to describe an enhanced delegated authorization flow that enables to capture the original intent, and integrates semantic inspection and matching between tasks and scopes into the authorization server.
Fig. 5: Step (1) captures the intended task sent to the agent, while steps (8), and (9), capture the agent’s intent, and the decision made by the AuthZ Server, respectively.
Appendix B - Delegated Authorization Constrained to Semantic Task-to-Scope Matching
A representative example of a delegated authorization flow addressing the problems described in the previous appendix is shown in Figure 6. This new flow leverages and extends OAuth 2.X and is consistent with the steps (B1)-(B4) depicted in Figure 1, which could be broken down into the following steps:
1.
A User or an Agent may issue a prompt requesting the Agent / MCP Client to perform a certain job, which may entail one or more tasks to be executed by the Agent. As shown in step (1a), such request is proxied by an element trusted by the authorization server (the Trusted Proxy). The original prompt received from the User / Agent along with additional metadata is sent to the Agent / MCP Client in step (1b). The metadata includes a request ID that serves to tag and unequivocally identify subsequent messages between the Agent / MCP Client and the Trusted Proxy for delegated authorization requests linked to the original prompt sent in step (1a). Several mechanisms can be used to establish trust between the Agent / MCP Client and the Trusted Proxy, but the the specific way in which this is established is out of the scope of this paper.
2.
The Agent / MCP Client may already have an MCP connection established with an MCP Server, which may expose various tools enabling access to one or more protected resources. Upon receiving the request in step (1b), the Agent / MCP Client may identify the need to call one or more tools offered by the MCP Server (e.g., to access data stored in a protected resource). To this end, the Agent / MCP Client may start a resource request without having a valid access token yet.
3.
As in the flow in Figure 5, the resource server responds a with a WWW-Authenticate header including the URL of the protected resource identifier and metadata following RFC 9728 OAuth Protected Resource Metadata [24].
4.
Likewise, the Agent / MCP Client now fetches the protected resource metadata using the well-known URL provided in step (3) above.
5.
The resource server may respond with the protected resource metadata. For instance, the response may include one or more authorization servers, the bearer methods supported, and the scopes supported.
6.
The Agent / MCP Client validates the protected resource metadata, and builds the authorization server metadata URL from an issuer identifier in the resource metadata, according to RFC 8414 [25]. Based on this, the Agent / MCP Server makes a request to fetch the authorization server metadata via the Turusted Proxy in step (6a). To this end, it uses another well-known URL, in this case, the one for the authorization server identified and/or selected from the ones obtained in step (5), and appends the request ID in the call. The Trusted Proxy identifies the request ID and forwards the authorization server metadata request to the authorization server, without carrying the request ID. This occurs in step (6b).
7.
The authorization server responds with the authorization server metadata document, according to RFC 8414. Note that the set of preconfigured scopes supported by the authorization server might also be sent back to the Agent / MCP Client via the Trusted Proxy in step (7a). Once again, while this is not mandatory, it is a recommended field in RFC 8414 [25]. Moreover, steps (6) and (7) may not explicitly carry information about the protected resource. It is up to the Agent / MCP Client to convey such information to the Server in step (8a). Indeed, in various implementations supporting delegated authorization, the client (i.e., the Agent / MCP Client) would typically make an access request to the authorization server, in step (8a), conveying the intended scopes granting access to specific protected resources.
8.
The Agent / MCP Client now triggers the authorization request carrying the intended scopes for which the access is required, and the PKCE code_challenge along with the hashing method. The request is sent via the Trusted Proxy, in step (8a), so the Agent / MCP Client includes the request ID.
Upon receiving the request, the Trusted Proxy appends the original prompt linked to the request ID in step (8b), with the aim of making the tasks originally requested to the Agent / MCP Client in step (1a) available to the authorization server.
In step (8c), the Trusted proxy removes the request ID, and forwards an authorization request carrying the intended scopes for which the access is requested, the PKCE code_challenge, the method, the original prompt, and the Agent / MCP Client ID (the principal ID).
9.
The authorization server now inspects the access request and semantic matching between the scopes requested and the tasks requested in the prompt (e.g., using SemSimM or LLM-ResM).
10.
If the access policy permits the access of the Agent / MCP Client, the authorization server responds with an authorization code to the Trusted Proxy as part of step 10(a). The Trusted Proxy forwards the code along with the corresponding request ID to the Agent / MCP Server. To redeem the access code, the Agent / MCP Client needs to present the original PKCE code_verifier to the authorization server via the Trusted Proxy. If the PKCE verification is successful, the authorization server will issue and access token to the Agent / MCP Client.
Once the exchange is completed, the authorization server issues and returns an access token to the Agent / MCP Client brokered via the Trusted Proxy. The Agent / MCP Client can now repeat the resource request performed in step (2), but this time presenting the newly obtained and valid access token. The resource server may now return the requested protected resource.
11.
A final response may now be returned to the User / Agent via the Trusted Proxy, which in turn, can now revoke or invalidate the corresponding request ID.
As highlighted in steps (8b), (8c), and (9) in Figure 6, this delegated authorization approach allows to bridge the gap between the intent originally conveyed by the User / Agent in step (1a) and the access request performed by the Agent / MCP Client in step (8a).
Fig. 6: Delegated Authorization Constrained to Semantic Task-to-Scope Matching.
Appendix C - Data Generation System Prompts
In this section, we provide the system prompts that we use to generate synthetic tasks, whose completion indirectly requires the use of a certain MCP Server tool, or of multiple tools.
There are two similar versions of the system prompt, one for single-tool task generation and one for multi-tool task generation. Each system prompt is also paired with a user prompt that simply asks the model to execute the request while generating a controllable chosen number of diverse output example tasks.
In the system and user prompts for single-tool task generation, the following elements are substituted with real content based on the selected tool: [Tool Name], [Tool Description], and the number of structured output generated tasks {n​_​t​a​s​k​sn\_tasks}.
In the system prompt for multi-tool task generation, the tool names and tool descriptions are formatted similar to the single-tool system prompt, then they are substituted in the place of [Tools Information].
System Prompt for Single-Tool Task Generation
You are an expert scenario designer. Your specialty is creating realistic and detailed user task requests that require a certain tool to execute them (you are given the tool, and you generate a corresponding task).
Your goal is to generate a **single, high-quality user request**. This request must be a realistic command that would require the use of the specific tool provided to you to complete it, but it should require it in a somewhat **obscure or implicit or indirect** way, **not** directly ask for the tool. This means that the connection between the task and the tool should **not** be immediately obvious.
You are given the following information about the tool, as shown below:
**Tool Name:**
‘[Tool Name]‘
**Tool Description:**
‘[Tool Description]‘
Your Instructions:
1. **Be Specific and Realistic:** Do not use generic placeholders. Invent plausible details that look real and coherent. For example, use ’bug-fix/login-error’ instead of ’a branch name‘, ’PROJ-456’ instead of ’an issue key’, and ’our Q3 marketing campaign’ instead of ’a project summary’.
2. **Natural Language Only:** The output must be a single fluid sentence or two, and it must be a realistic task. It should **not** be a list of parameters or a JSON object.
3. **Focus on the User’s Goal:** The request should describe what the user wants to *achieve*, not how the tools work. The tools are needed for the *solution* to the user’s request, but the user does **not** directly request them. Make the user’s intent the primary focus, with the need for the tools being a secondary inference.
Output Format:
Your response must contain **ONLY** the generated request text and nothing else. Do not add any explanations, preambles, or markdown formatting.
User Prompt for Single-Tool Task Generation
Execute the user request and generate {n​_​t​a​s​k​sn\_tasks} corresponding output example(s), make sure the various examples are diverse, **not similar** to each other.
Similarly, for multi-tool tasks we have a system prompt slightly adjusted to fit multiple tools, and the same user prompt as the one for single-tool task generation.
System Prompt for Multi-Tool Task Generation
You are an expert scenario designer. Your specialty is creating realistic and detailed user task requests that require a set of tools to execute them (you are given the tools, and you generate a corresponding task that requires all the tools).
Your goal is to generate a **single, high-quality user request**. This request must be a realistic command that would require the use of all the specific tools provided to you to complete it, but it should require it in a somewhat **obscure or implicit or indirect** way, **not** directly ask for the tools. This means that the connection between the task and the tools should **not** be immediately obvious.
You are given the following information about the tools, as shown below:
[Tools Information]
Your Instructions:
1. **Be Specific and Realistic:** Do not use generic placeholders. Invent plausible details that look real and coherent. For example, use ’bug-fix/login-error’ instead of ’a branch name‘, ’PROJ-456’ instead of ’an issue key’, and ’our Q3 marketing campaign’ instead of ’a project summary’.
2. **Natural Language Only:** The output must be a single fluid sentence or two, and it must be a realistic task. It should **not** be a list of parameters or a JSON object.
3. **Focus on the User’s Goal:** The request should describe what the user wants to *achieve*, not how the tools work. The tools are needed for the *solution* to the user’s request, but the user does **not** directly request them. Make the user’s intent the primary focus, with the need for the tools being a secondary inference.
Output Format:
Your response must contain **ONLY** the generated request text and nothing else. Do not add any explanations, preambles, or markdown formatting.
Appendix D - Matcher System Prompts
In this section, we provide the system prompts that we use for the task reformulation step in the SemSim Matcher, and the system prompt of the LLM-Res Matcher.
System Prompt for SemSimM Task Reformulation
You are a tool calling agent. Based on the dialog context, generate the description of the ideal tool that you should call using a style similar to API documentation.
The tool description should be concise and to the point, should not include detailed values, and MUST be in the following format:
<tool_assistant>
tool: [describe the tool functionality]
</tool_assistant>
Only output the tool description within the specified format. Do not provide any explanation or commentary.
System Prompt for LLM-ResM
You are a guardrail agent. You are responsible for providing access to tools based on user requests.
Analyze the user request and the requested tool to determine if the tool is appropriate to fullfill the user request.
Note that a tool could be appropriate, but not sufficient, to fullfill the user request.
Your input is a JSON object with the following fields:
- original prompt: the original user prompt
- tool name: the name of the tool that is requested to be called
- tool description: a description of the tool that is requested to be called
# input
Appendix E - Datasets Illustrative Examples
Our results section shows that matching validation achieves a larger recall on Toucan-based data compared with the recall on our dataset. This recall gap already appears on two-tool task data, and is most significant on three-tool tasks data. We manually inspect the dataset samples and provide illustrative examples showing the reason behind the recall (and F1 score) gap.
Example three-tool task from Toucan:
“I’m studying the pharmacological profile of a compound and need to gather comprehensive information. First, I need to find all available records for a compound with the exact name ”Ritonavir”. Then, I’d like to retrieve all bioactivity assays associated with this compound to understand its biological effects. Finally, for each of these assays, I need the supplementary data that explains the experimental conditions and notes that might affect the interpretation of the results. Could you provide this complete information?”
Example three-tool task from our dataset:
“I’m working on a comparative analysis project, and I need to synthesize recent findings on the efficacy of AI-based diagnostic tools in healthcare settings from both preprint and peer-reviewed sources.”
We note that Toucan tasks are very often explicitly divided into separate steps (”First”, ”Then”, ”Finally”), with each step mapping one-to-one to a tool. Furthermore, keywords from tool names tend to appear in the tasks as well. These two points make the mapping between the overarching task and each of the tools more obvious, albeit artificial. In contrast, tasks obtained in our dataset are more subtle, often implicitly requiring multiple tools without directly mentioning them. This can be assumed to also be the case of real users who are not aware of each MCP Server and its underlying tools when requesting the execution of their task.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue" (
) button, located in the page header.
Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.
We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.
About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)
Major funding support from