URL https://arxiv.org/html/2601.05635v1; sections S3 to S5 excluded; result tables omitted; fetched 2026-10-03



 3 Method 

 

This study aims to address continual pretraining from a small corpus and the privacy challenges in LLMs through efficient, high-quality data synthesis. Figure  1 illustrates the problem setting.
We first describe the overall workflow of our approach ( 3.1 ). Then, we present the PII entity extraction and encryption and decryption method in detail ( 3.2 ). Next, we describe the entity-based data synthesis process and discuss privacy guarantee and leakage in this process ( 3.3 ). 
 



 3.1 Workflow 

 

The workflow of our approach consists of several key stages aimed at preserving privacy while enabling continual learning in large language models, see Figure  2 . First, entities are extracted from the data corpus using the Named Entity Recognition (NER) model, regular expression techniques and LLMs. Then we recognize the PII entities, such as names, locations, phone numbers, and other sensitive information. These entities will be encrypted using AES encryption with a private key on synthetic data, ensuring that sensitive information remains secure. We analyze the association strength between entities and create a weighted graph. Following graph creation, synthetic data generation on entity tuples is carried out by large language models, such as GPT 4o and DeepSeek, which generate questions and answers, analyze entity relations, and filter irrelevant data. The resulting synthetic encrypted data is used to pretrain LLMs. 
 
 



 3.2 PII preservation 

 

Preserving the privacy of personally identifiable information (PII) is essential when training models on sensitive data. In this work, we employ a combination of entity extraction and encryption techniques to ensure that PII is securely handled and protected throughout the process. 
 
 

 PII extraction . To identify PII entities, we use a combination of named entity recognition (NER) models ( Honnibal, 2017 ; Mendels et al., 2018 ; Zhao et al., 2019 ; Xu et al., 2020 ) and regular expression patterns. NER models are employed to recognize entities such as names, locations, and other contextual PII, while regex patterns help identify more structured PII, including phone numbers and bank card numbers. These extraction techniques are integrated into the Microsoft Presidio toolkit ( Mendels et al., 2018 ) , which facilitates the extraction of sensitive information from text. 
 
 

 PII encryption . To ensure the privacy of PII, we apply the symmetric encryption algorithm AES in ECB mode to encrypt the extracted PII entities ( Daemen, 1999 ; Dworkin, 2001 ; Rijmen and Daemen, 2001 ) . We choose ECB mode intentionally because it produces deterministic ciphertext - the same plaintext entity is always encrypted to the same ciphertext. This consistency is crucial for allowing the LLM to learn entity-level associations and maintain coherence. In contrast, more secure modes like CBC introduce randomness, resulting in non-deterministic ciphertexts. This makes it impossible for the model to recognize that multiple different-looking ciphers refer to the same underlying entity. PII in both synthetic documents and the original corpus is encrypted using this algorithm, ensuring that sensitive data remains secure. After encryption, the ciphertext is encoded in Base64 format ( Wikipedia, 2025 ) , which includes a mix of alphabets, numbers, and special characters. To further improve the integrity and interpretability of the encrypted data, we prepend a prefix to the encrypted PII. For example, names are encrypted and formatted as Person_[cipher_name] , ensuring that the PII remains secure and distinguishable. 
 
 



 3.3 Entity-based synthetic data generation 

 

In generating entity-based synthetic data, we follow the procedures outlined in Entigraph ( Yang et al., 2024 ) , with several key modifications designed to enable to more efficient and comprehensive data generation. The process consists of three main steps: entity extraction, entity description, and relation analysis. Below, we describe the adaptations we made to the standard Entigraph approach: 
 
 

 Entity extraction . In contrast to Entigraph, which relies solely on LLMs for entity extraction, we utilize a combination of LLMs, along with NER models. Our experiments show that extracting more comprehensive entities improves model performance, especially as the number of entities increases during continual pretraining. Relying only on LLMs for extraction may miss key entities, limiting the data coverage and model performance. 
 
 

 Relation analysis . While Entigraph focuses on generating pairwise and 3-tuple relationships due to the computational intensity of considering all possible tuples, we extend this approach by generating a wider range of k-tuples ( k C , we provide the prompt used to obtain the association strength scores. This allows us to generate more comprehensive relations among entities. 
 
 

 Data filtering . After generating the synthetic data, we apply filtering techniques to eliminate samples that do not adhere to the instruction. This step ensures that the synthesized data is high-quality and relevant to the task at hand, thereby improving the effectiveness of the pretraining process Li et al. (2024a) ; Xie et al. (2023) ; Tirumala et al. (2023) . 
 
 

 Privacy leakage and privacy considerations. 
If entity recognition and encryption are applied after data synthesis, privacy protection depends heavily on the recall of named entity recognition (NER) models. In such cases, high-recall NER models can detect most names and locations, while regular expressions capture numerical identifiers such as dates and identification numbers. Nevertheless, rare, ambiguous, or context-dependent entities may still be missed, resulting in residual PII and potential privacy leakage (see Appendix  A.4 for empirical statistics). 
 
 

To mitigate this risk, we could perform PII detection and encryption prior to data synthesis. The original corpora considered in this study are small and manageable, allowing us to apply a combination of LLM-based and NER-based entity extraction followed by manual verification. All identified PII entities are encrypted before any synthetic data generation is performed. Consequently, data synthesis is conditioned solely on encrypted representations, substantially reducing the exposure of sensitive information during generation and subsequent training. While this design does not claim formal cryptographic security guarantees, it provides a practical and controlled privacy protection mechanism suitable for exploring the feasibility of continual pretraining on encrypted data. We note that our use of deterministic encryption is motivated by functional requirements for consistency during continual pretraining; the security trade-offs and limitations of this choice are discussed in the Limitations section Ethical Considerations . 
 
 

By incorporating these modifications, we ensure that the synthetic data generation process is comprehensive, efficient and supporting continual learning with preserving privacy. 
 
 
 



 4 Experiments & Evaluation 

 

In this section, we describe the experimental setup ( 4.1 ) and conduct a comprehensive evaluation of our proposed approach. Specifically, we assess the impact of entity-related factors on model performance ( 4.2 ), the effectiveness of our method in preserving personally identifiable information (PII) ( 4.3 ), the comparison of different model performances ( 4.4 ), and the assessment of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) capabilities ( 4.5 ). 
 



 4.1 Experimental setup 

 

 Data corpus . The data corpus used for experiments consists of two primary components, the Quality dataset and the Chinese Judge case dataset ( Pang et al., 2022 ; Supreme Peoples Court, 2024 ) . The Quality is a general purpose dataset with multiple-choice QA in English, and we sort the Chinese Judge case dataset from ( Supreme Peoples Court, 2024 ) as the primary corpus to evaluate the model performance. We designed the QA pairs for the Chinese Judge dataset to assess the models’ ability to handle sensitive real-world data. Details of the Chinese Judge dataset are described in the Appendix B . 
 
 

We evaluate our results on English articles with 125 questions and Chinese articles with 72 questions in the Quality and Judge datasets. We synthesize data for continual pretraining with 10M to 30M tokens generated from an original source text of 65K tokens. The reason for using a small number of tokens is that Entigraph shows log-linear scaling of accuracy with all articles Yang et al. (2024) . This setup allows us to analyze the effectiveness of continual pretraining in domain-limited scenarios, which are relevant in privacy-preserving and cost-sensitive applications. 
 
 

 Synthesis and training . We first synthesize the data by extracting entities using LLMs and NER models Honnibal (2017) ; Xu et al. (2020) ; Zhao et al. (2019) (the en_core_web_lg spaCy model for English NER), generating relevant question-answer pairs and relationships using GPT-4o mini ( OpenAI, 2024 ) and Deepseek ( DeepSeek-AI et al., 2024a ) for English and Chinese data generation. The data is synthesized from the original corpus to continually pretrain LLama3 8B and Qwen2.5 7B Grattafiori et al. (2024) ; Qwen et al. (2025) . We synthesize the data once for each model training, as it is time-consuming and expensive to synthesize by calling LLM APIs. We continually pretrain models on 8 Nvidia A100 GPUs, each with 40GB device memory with parameter settings in Appendix A.3 . We do not evaluate additional model sizes for two main reasons. First, in our initial experiments using LLaMA3 2B with only names encrypted Grattafiori et al. (2024) , the model’s performance was only marginally better than random guessing. Second, due to limited computational resources, we did not extend pretraining to larger models such as the 13B or 70B variants. 
 
 



 4.2 The effect of entity-related factors 

 

We explore how various entity-related factors influence the performance of the model during continual pretraining. Specifically, we evaluate the number of entities, and the length of relation tuples to determine their impact on the quality of the synthetic data and model performance. 
 

 100 200 300 400 500 600 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 Number of entity Accuracy fixed #relation fixed #tokens 
 Figure 3: The effect on number of entities. 
 
 

 Number of entities . We investigate how the number of entities in the synthetic data affects the model’s performance. To do this, we vary the number of entities used for data synthesis and evaluate the model’s performance on a QA task. Our hypothesis is that a higher number of entities will lead to improved performance, as the synthetic data comprehensively covers the knowledge in the original data corpus. Figure 3 illustrates the effect of the entity number on the Chinese Judge case QA. We vary the entity number while keeping the number of relation constant (blue squares). The fixed #tokens refers to the fixed number of tokens at 20M in synthetic data (orange circles). Both curves show a general increasing trend in accuracy, but the fixed #relation curve demonstrates a smoother and more consistent increase compared to the fluctuations in the fixed #tokens curve. 
 
 

 Length of tuples .
Next, we examine the effect of the relation tuple length on performance. Relation tuples contain a certain number of entities and represent connections between them including relationships, interactions and dependencies. We vary the maximum length of these tuples and generate tuples according to the weighted graph. To assess the impact of tuple length, we evaluate the performance of models on a QA task. 
 


 [result table omitted; consult original if quantitative claim needed] 
 Table 1: The effect on the length of entity tuple. 
 
 

We prune edges between two entities if their association strength is less than 0.5. We maintain approximately 22K generated relations while varying the maximum tuple length. Our results show that there is a performance increase as the length of relation tuples reaches 10 in both original and encrypted synthetic data pretraining. Prior to this point, there is a fluctuation as the length increases. This trend is illustrated in Table 1 . The highest accuracy is achieved when the tuple length is set to 10, with scores of 0.72 and 0.68, which surpass the results obtained using EntiGraph generation (0.68 and 0.61). 
 
 



 4.3 PII preservation 

 

In this subsection, we investigate whether encrypted data preserves PII. 
 
 

 Judge case dataset results . We designed multiple-choice questions related to privacy within the dataset.
Then, we performed an experiment to test whether the PII entities are critical for answering the questions we designed by assessing whether the model requires access to PII entities to answer the questions correctly. The experimental setup involves testing the model’s ability to answer these PII-related questions when the PII entities are masked, thereby simulating a scenario in which the model does not have access to private information. 
 


 [result table omitted; consult original if quantitative claim needed] 
 Table 2: The importance of PII for question answering in the Judge case dataset. 
 
 

The results, shown in Table 2 , demonstrate that when the PII entities are masked, the base model performs with an accuracy of only 0.208, which is the same as the model pretrained with the original data. The responses of synthetic model on masked questions show a slightly higher performance than the base model (close to random selection - 0.25), but exhibit a significant drop compared to the synthetic model with unmasked questions. This confirms that our PII-related questions are indeed private and require the PII to answer accurately. 
 


 [result table omitted; consult original if quantitative claim needed] 
 Table 3: Performance comparison among models on Quality and Judge case datasets. 
 
 

Next, we compare the performance of three models:
the base model, the crypto model pretrained with encrypted synthetic data with encrypted questions (encS.) and the crypto model pretrained with encrypted synthetic data but evaluated with plaintext questions (noEncQ.). Our assumption is that if the crypto model can only answer encrypted questions, but not their unencrypted counterparts, then it is unaware of the private information. 
 

 Quality Judge Case PII Quality 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.42 0.38 0.41 0.60 0.57 0.61 0.53 0.58 0.38 0.44 Accuracy base encS. noEncQ. 
 Figure 4: Performance comparison between base and crypto models. 
 
 

Figure 4 illustrates the performance of these models in terms of PII preservation. The encS. model significantly outperforms the base model. In contrast, the noEncQ. model evaluated with plaintext questions shows no performance improvement compared to the base model. These results indicate that the encrypted model does not leak additional information and is unable to recognize the relationship between the plaintext and its ciphertext, thereby preserving PII. 
 
 

 Quality dataset results . Since the Quality dataset contains little sensitive information, we briefly analyze its performance to validate our privacy preservation findings. As illustrated in Figure 4 , the encS. model outperforms the base model, while the noEncQ. model performs slightly below the encS. model. This is expected, as the majority of questions in the Quality dataset do not contain PII information, making privacy preservation less relevant in most cases. To further investigate the effect of PII-specific questions, we conducted an additional experiment by using a subset of 35 questions that contain names (PII-Quality). The results show that in this subset, noEncQ. performs the same score as the base model, reinforcing our conclusion from the Judge Case dataset. 
 
 



 4.4 Performance comparison 

 

To evaluate the effectiveness of our encryption-based approach, we conduct a performance comparison using five different models on the Quality dataset and Judge Case dataset. Table 3 shows the experimental data of model performance.
Figure 5 shows the results for the Quality and Judge case datasets. In the Quality dataset, the synthetic model (synt.) significantly improves accuracy over the base model, achieving 0.63, while the encS. model reaches a comparable level. In contrast, continual pretraining on the original dataset (orig.) provides only a modest improvement (0.48), and encrypting the original dataset (encO.) eliminates this benefit, bringing accuracy back to the base level (0.42). The base model refers to the original model without pretraining on either dataset. The synthetic pretrained model (synt.) is pretrained on synthetic data, while the encrypted synthetic pretrained model (encS.) is pretrained on the encrypted version of the same synthetic data. The continually pretrained model on original data (orig.) is continually trained on original datasets. The continual pretrained model on encrypted original data (encO.) is trained on encrypted original datasets. The data for encS. model training is the encrypted version of synthetic data for the synt. model training. 
 

 Quality Chinese Judge Case 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.42 0.38 0.63 0.68 0.60 0.61 0.48 0.33 0.42 0.40 Accuracy base synt. encS. orig. encO. 
 Figure 5: Performance comparison among base, trained models and crypto models. 
 
 

On the Judge case dataset, where names and locations were encrypted in encS., we observe that while synthetic pretraining significantly boosts performance (0.68), encrypting PII leads to a slight drop to 0.61. In contrast, continual pretraining on the original data (orig.) and its encrypted counterpart (encO.) yields lower performance, reaching only 0.33 and 0.40, respectively. We further tested an encS. model trained on data where all PII (including bank card numbers, ID numbers, phone numbers, and dates, etc.) was encrypted, leading to a lower accuracy of 0.569. This suggests encrypting a wider range of PII impacts performance. 
 
 

Overall, these results highlight that synthetic data effectively enhance model performance, while encryption allows for privacy preservation slightly degrading accuracy. 
 
 



 4.5 Evaluation of RAG performance 

 

To evaluate retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) performance, we utilize word embeddings of the questions, generated using techniques from ( Chen et al., 2024 ) and ( Sentence-Transformers, 2022 ) . These embeddings are used to calculate the most relevant text by retrieving the top K document chunks that are most contextually aligned with the question. After retrieval, the document chunks are reranked using methods proposed by ( Sun et al., 2024 ) and ( Mixedbread, 2024 ) , which helps refine the ranking to select the top K results. The retrieved chunks are then used as a context for answering the question. 
 


 [result table omitted; consult original if quantitative claim needed] 
 Table 4: RAG performance comparison with the chunk size 1024. Retr., Synt. and Encr. denote for retrieval, synthesis and encryption, respectively. 
 
 

Table 4 displays the RAG performance results for both the Quality and Judge case datasets. We set the document chunk size to 1024 tokens and evaluated how the retrieved context influences the model performance. RAG consistently improves model performance across both datasets, with the greatest gains observed in models with partially encrypted data, while models with fully encrypted PII show less improvement - details are provided in Appendix  A.2 . 
 
 

In the evaluation, we test the factors that attribute to model performance and validate the effectiveness and efficiency of our data synthesis method for pretraining. In Appendix A.1 , we collect statistical data of hallucination in encrypted entities. An example of how the crypto model interacts with user queries is provided in Appendix D .
