AI Psychometrics: Evaluating the Psychological Reasoning of Large Language Models with Psychometric Validities
<link rel="stylesheet" href="styles.cf390c6bfbe7555f.css">
Skip to main content
Communities & Collections
All of ScholarSpace
Statistics
Log In
Log in with UH Login
Log in
New user? Click here to register.
Have you forgotten your password?
Home
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS)
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences 2025
Knowledge Innovation and Entrepreneurial Systems
Technical, Socio-Economic, and Ethical Aspects of AI
AI Psychometrics: Evaluating the Psychological Reasoning of Large Language Models with Psychometric Validities
AI Psychometrics: Evaluating the Psychological Reasoning of Large Language Models with Psychometric Validities
Loading...
Files
0509.pdf
(502.01 KB)
Date
2025-01-07
Authors
Li, Yibai
Lin, Xiaolin
Sha, Zhenghui
Jin, Zhiye
Lee, Emily
Contributor
Advisor
Editor
Performer
Department
Instructor
Depositor
Speaker
Researcher
Consultant
Interviewer
Interviewee
Narrator
Transcriber
Annotator
Journal Title
Journal ISSN
Volume Title
Publisher
Journal Name
Volume
Number/Issue
Starting Page
5189
Ending Page
Alternative Title
Abstract
The immense number of parameters and deep neural networks make large language models (LLMs) rival the complexity of human brains, which also makes them opaque "black box" systems that are challenging to evaluate and interpret. AI Psychometrics is an emerging field that aims to tackle these challenges by applying psychometric methodologies to evaluate and interpret the psychological traits and processes of artificial intelligence (AI) systems. This paper investigates the application of AI Psychometrics to evaluate the psychological reasoning and overall psychometric validity of four prominent LLMs: GPT-3.5, GPT-4, LLaMA-2, and LLaMA-3. Using the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM), we examined convergent, discriminant, predictive, and external validity across these models. Our findings reveal that the responses from all these models generally met all validity criteria. Moreover, higher-performing models like GPT-4 and LLaMA-3 consistently demonstrated superior psychometric validity compared to their predecessors, GPT-3.5 and LLaMA-2. These results help to establish the validity of applying AI Psychometrics to evaluate and interpret large language models.
Description
Keywords
Technical, Socio-Economic, and Ethical Aspects of AI
,
ai psychometrics, artificial intelligence, explainable ai, large language models, llms psychometric validity
Subject Headings
Citation
URI
https://hdl.handle.net/10125/109471
DOI
https://doi.org/10.24251/HICSS.2025.623
Extent
9
Format
Type
Conference Paper
Geographic Location
Time Period
Related To
Proceedings of the 58th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
Related To (URI)
Table of Contents
Rights
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International
Rights Holder
Catalog Record
Local Contexts
Collections
Technical, Socio-Economic, and Ethical Aspects of AI
Endorsement
Review
Supplemented By
Referenced By
Creative Commons license
Except where otherwise noted, this item's license is described as
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International
Full item page
Email libraryada-l@lists.hawaii.edu if you need this content in ADA-compliant format.
ScholarSpace is the institutional repository for the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa and is maintained by Hamilton Library.
Upload Your Work
Open Access at UHM
Library Website
UH Mānoa Website
University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa
Hamilton Library
2550 McCarthy Mall
Honolulu, HI 96822
© University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa Library
sspace@hawaii.edu
Send Feedback
Library Digital Collections Disclaimer and Copyright Information
