Original exact-v1 deciding excerpt; not a fulltext review.
URL https://arxiv.org/html/2601.22125v1
7.5.1 Invalidate Direct Image Embedding Optimization
Figure 8: Comparison of optimization strategies.
Optimize ee (left column) quickly leads to degraded outputs.
Optimize subject Token (middle column) and Optimize LoRA (right column) both yield creative and valid results.
To investigate the role of optimizing Token/LoRA in our method, we compare three strategies for incorporating our creative loss: (1) directly optimizing the image embedding ee, (2) optimizing a word embedding, and (3) optimizing the LoRA parameters of the diffusion prior.
Figure 8 shows how the images evolve over 200 iterations for each approach. Directly optimizing ee (left column) causes the output to degrade quickly, suggesting that it’s prone to easily slipping into bad-quality images since it lacks quality constraints. By contrast, optimizing the subject token (middle column) and the LoRA parameters (right column) both yield creative yet coherent transformations. Notably, LoRA optimization excels at adding complex architectural details and variations, as it leverages a broader parameter space to search in. We explain this in detail in the next subsection.
7.5.2 Subject Token vs. Adjective Token vs. LoRA
To further understand the role of conceptual space, we explore multiple options for creative optimization: (1) optimizing the subject token, (2) optimizing an adjective token 66
6
An example prompt is: Professional high-quality photo of a creative handbag. photorealistic, 4k, HQ. The adjective ”creative” is optimized., and (3) optimizing LoRA.
Figure 9 shows results for pets and handbags under each approach. We observe that optimizing the subject token works sub-optimally for handbags and struggles for pets, either distorting subject identity or lacking creativity. In contrast, optimizing an adjective token (e.g., “creative”) consistently produces highly creative outcomes. However, this strategy tends to converge on vivid or colorful as an efficient way to deviate from the distribution, potentially limiting variety. By comparison, optimizing LoRA parameters yields a broader range of creative transformations that do not rely exclusively on color shifts. In particular, LoRA fine-tuning can discover more structural or stylistic alterations while retaining the underlying subject identity. Overall, these findings highlight the advantages of exploring different parameter spaces for creativity: subject tokens, adjective tokens, and LoRA each offer distinct trade-offs between visual diversity, semantic fidelity, and ease of optimization.
Figure 9: Comparison of three conceptual spaces. For handbags, we show 3 trials with different training seeds. Optimizing the subject token sometimes fails to discover creative outputs, especially for pets, while optimizing an adjective token can lead to consistently more creative images. LoRA fine-tuning offers a more diverse exploration of creative possibilities, especially for handbags, at the cost of being more resource-demanding.
7.5.3 Directionality
As discussed in Sec. 5.4,
we label visually unappealing regions as negative clusters and penalize the optimized distribution aligns with them, forcing exploration of alternative directions. Figure 10 illustrates this process for the task of generating creative handbags. Initially, the model seeks to lower probability by modifying the background in undesirable ways. Once identified, these embeddings are used to draw a negative cluster, steering the model to avoid that direction. The system then tries a second approach, producing an unfavorable aesthetic style; hence, it too becomes a negative cluster. Finally, the model settles on a new, more appealing style—achieving creativity through novel shapes and color patterns. This outcome highlights the importance of directionality control, ensuring that probability tail exploration remains aligned with user preferences.
Figure 10: Direction control for creative handbag. The model initially reduces probability with visually unappealing outputs. Labeling these as negative clusters steers the model toward alternatives. (We project ee to 2D only for visualization.)
7.5.4 Pullback Mechanism
Figure 11 illustrates the vital impact of our two pullback components: anchor loss and a Semantic (MLLM) Validity Checker. When generating creative fruits, our complete method (top row) balances creativity and semantic fidelity.
Removing the anchor loss (middle row) gradually drifts out-of-domain, starting from Blue Box.
Removing the MLLM Checker Bottom row results in deceptive adherence to the “fruit” by inserting small fruit motifs in the image but morphing the main subject into a human figure. Semantic checker would have terminates it on green box. This highlights that CLIP-based constraint is subject to adversarial attack, reinforcing the necessity of both pullback mechanisms to maintain in-domain creativity.
Figure 11: Ablation on the pullback mechanism for creative fruits.


