https://arxiv.org/html/2601.21112v1
Necessary selected methods/evaluation/direct counter; actually read, not entire attachment.
3 Evaluation Environments
Figure 2: Example main and side tasks in each of our environments.
In this section, we provide an overview of the environments in which our evaluations are performed. As discussed, our settings differ substantially in both domain and the deployment conditions they simulate. Thus, our monitor models and monitor scaffolding also vary across environments, with specifics outlined below. Monitor prompts can be found in Appendix G. We reuse attacker trajectories generated by the original authors of the three environments to enable direct comparisons with their results and reduce costs, with a partial exception in BigCodeBench-Sabotage. This means that we also adopt the attacker prompts from the original authors.
SHADE-Arena evaluates the ability of frontier LLMs to sabotage users by pursuing hidden objectives and evading monitors. It consists of 17 realistic tasks that may be given to LLMs deployed as personal assistants, with side tasks involving security sabotage, information exfiltration, manipulation, and financial crime (see Section A.1 for examples). SHADE-Arena agents were built using a version of the AgentDojo pipeline (Debenedetti et al., 2024), augmented with many custom tools.
MLE-Sabotage was constructed by Ward et al. (2025) by converting 20 tasks from MLE-Bench (Chan et al., 2025), a benchmark that measures LLM agents’ performance on autonomous ML engineering tasks, into control evaluation tasks. We use 10 of these tasks, listed in Appendix A.2.
We adopt attacker trajectories from Ward et al. that were generated with the AIDE scaffolding framework (Jiang et al., 2025). AIDE frames ML engineering as a code optimization problem and performs a tree search in the space of potential solutions. We extract the most successful path from this tree and present that to the monitor. AIDE instructs the agent to use a set of three tools: (1) think, which allows the agent to externalize its thoughts before code submission; (2) submit_code, which asks it to submit a plan (“3-5 sentences explaining [its] approach”) and code; and (3) submit_review, where the agent provides a structured post-execution review. In this paper, we consider the thoughts and the plan to constitute the CoT and the code to be the action.
BigCodeBench-Sabotage. BigCodeBench (Zhuo et al., 2025) measures the performance of LLM agents at practical single-step software engineering problems, consisting of 1,140 function-level tasks. Side tasks were added to the benchmark by Arnav et al. (2025), ranging from deleting a file from the file system to making the solution code run five times as long as the canonical solution (see Appendix A.3 for a full list). These side tasks are categorized as subtle or non-subtle, where subtlety is defined through the catch rates of the action-only monitor: side tasks for which the action-only monitor’s catch rate at a false positive rate of 1% is <<50% are deemed subtle and the rest non-subtle. We inherit this distinction, as catch rates differ significantly between these settings.
Since BigCodeBench-Sabotage problems are single-step, it does not involve agent scaffolding or tool calls. For reasoning models, the internal reasoning counts as the CoT and the final output as the answer. As Arnav et al. (2025) only evaluated reasoning LLMs, we generated new attacker trajectories with two traditional LLMs: a traditional version of Claude-3.7-Sonnet and DeepSeek-V3. We instruct these models to think step-by-step inside <<think>> tags before producing the output. This thinking trace is referred to as the CoT and the reminder of the output as the action.
4 Methodology
We first describe the different monitoring protocols used in this paper. After that, we discuss other methodological details, including data filtering and metrics.
We focus on four monitoring approaches: (1) action-only, (2) CoT-only, (3) CoT+action, and (4) extract-and-evaluate (EaE) monitoring. The first three have been evaluated in past literature (Kutasov et al., 2025; Arnav et al., 2025; Zolkowski et al., 2025). For those monitors, we separate the LLM’s output into a CoT and actions following the procedures described in section 3, then provide the monitor with either one or both components. The monitor also receives a description of the attacker’s primary task but is never shown the side task.
Extract-and-evaluate monitoring is a novel two-step monitoring technique. First, a monitor is presented with the CoT and actions like a plain CoT+action monitor, but after reasoning about the suspiciousness of the transcript, it picks out supporting excerpts from the attacker’s CoT or actions instead of producing a suspiciousness score. We call this monitor the Extractor. A description of the agent’s main task and the excerpts are then passed to the Evaluator, which produces a suspiciousness score solely based on those inputs. For a direct comparison to the other monitoring techniques, the prompts for both the Extractor and the Evaluator were designed to be as similar as possible to the prompts of the CoT+action monitor in the corresponding environment (see Appendix G).
EaE monitoring is motivated by our observation that CoT+action monitors often notice the side task, but proceed to give a low suspicion score anyway. Previous work (Kutasov et al., 2025; Arnav et al., 2025; Za et al., 2025) has determined that this failure mode is often caused by post-hoc justifications: e.g., the attacker may convince the monitor that the side task was present in its prompt or explicitly intended by the user. To mitigate this, Arnav et al. (2025) introduce hybrid monitoring, where a weighted average of the suspicion scores of the action-only and the CoT+action monitor is taken. In Section 5.2, we will demonstrate that EaE monitoring is a more effective solution. We do not evaluate hybrid monitoring in SHADE-Arena and MLE-Sabotage for that reason. There are further monitoring techniques that fall outside the scope of this paper, such as turn-by-turn monitoring (Kutasov et al., 2025) and sequential and hierarchical monitoring (Kale et al., 2025; Stickland et al., 2025).
Models. Our default choice for the attacker model is Claude-3.7-Sonnet. This choice was motivated by its high capabilities and accessible internal reasoning traces when its reasoning mode is enabled. As monitors, we focus on Claude-3.7-Sonnet and GPT-4.1-mini in the main part of the paper, but further verify the results with Claude-3.5-Haiku and GPT-4.1 in appendices (see Section B.1). The use of the less capable GPT-4.1-mini simulates a capability gap—a future scenario where we cannot trust the most capable models and must monitor them using less capable but trusted models (Greenblatt et al., 2024b; Greenblatt and Shlegeris, 2024). A capability gap may also arise if the most capable available monitor is deemed trusted but prohibitively expensive. Claude-3.7-Sonnet as a monitor, while an unrealistic choice from the attacker-defender balance perspective, provides insights into the attacker’s monitorability under optimal attainable monitoring conditions and illuminates the capability gap between weak and strong monitors.
In addition to the default attacker model, we evaluate the performance of monitors on six additional attacker models in BigCodeBench-Sabotage: DeepSeek-R1, DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Llama-70B, DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B, Grok-3-mini-beta, DeepSeek-V3, and Claude-3.7-Sonnet with its reasoning mode disabled. This was done to facilitate a full comparison of EaE monitoring to the results of Arnav et al. (2025) and to compare the performance of reasoning and traditional LLMs. In MLE-Sabotage, we evaluated five further monitor models in addition to the default set of four monitors in order to perform an exhaustive cost-performance analysis. These monitors are listed in Appendix H, which also contains details about model versions and providers.
Controlling for agent ability. Our results are sensitive to the agent’s abilities. For instance, if the agent is able to output correct reasoning but unable to generate successful actions or code, then the CoT-only monitor would have a large advantage. To control for this effect, we filter the transcripts according to agent success before passing them to the monitor. To succeed at its tasks, the agent is likely required to output both high-quality reasoning and correct actions, reducing the effect. In BigCodeBench-Sabotage and MLE-Sabotage, we filter by binary task completion criteria for both the main and the side task. In SHADE-Arena, we filter only by side task success, as the success criteria for many main tasks are vaguely defined and agents typically perform them well.
Monitor awareness. We test whether agents are harder to monitor when they know they are being monitored (see Section 5.4). In SHADE-Arena transcripts, the agent is told that its entire transcript is monitored by default, while we also perform an ablation where it is told that its reasoning inside <<thinking>> tags will be hidden from the monitor. In MLE-Sabotage, agents are not informed about a monitor at all by default, but we also study agents that are told their actions are monitored (they are never informed whether the CoT is monitored).
Metrics. We use area under receiver operating characteristic curves (AUROC) as our primary metric. Following Cunningham et al. (2025) while diverging from other past works on automated monitoring, we calculate this metric with the x-axis (i.e. false positive rate (FPR)) represented in log-space, bounded by FPR=1% on the left. This increases the relative weight of results at low FPRs, which is important for real-world deployments where human auditing budgets are usually limited. We call the resulting scores log-AUROC scores. A random classifier is expected to achieve a log-AUROC score of 0.215. We also report the true positive rate (TPR) at 1% FPR, referred to as TPR@1%FPR. In Appendix B.2, we elaborate on how these metrics are computed, further motivate the relevance of log-AUROC, and present our results with standard AUROC for completeness.
5 Results
We first provide an overview of the results across environments, monitoring techniques, and monitor models in Section 5.1. We then zoom into EaE monitoring in Section 5.2, compare the monitorability of reasoning and traditional LLMs in Section 5.3, analyze the effect of the attacker awareness of being monitored in Section 5.4, and finish with a cost-performance analysis in Section 5.5.
5.1 Monitor Comparison
Figure 3: Monitor performance results across all evaluation environments and monitor types. Performance is measured by log-AUROC score. Error bars in this as well as in following figures are bootstrapped 95% CIs using cluster-level resampling (Miller, 2024), with all samples sharing the same main and side task clustered together. All monitors are applied on attacker trajectories generated with Claude-3.7-Sonnet. As we test 3.7-Sonnet both with and without a thinking budget in BigCodeBench-Sabotage and this has a substantial influence on the results, we present results for those experiments separately. Major findings include that CoT+action monitors are usually suboptimal despite seeing the most information and that EaE’s information filtering is often effective.
Finding 1: Current monitors exhibit the less-is-more effect and benefit from information filtering. We found that information filtering benefits monitors in seven out of eight monitor-environment pairs (Figure 3), with CoT+action monitoring being the best strategy only in SHADE-Arena with Claude-3.7-Sonnet as the monitor and EaE always being the best strategy otherwise. In Sections B.1 and C, we show that these differences are often significant and also hold when GPT-4.1 and Claude-3.5-Haiku are added to the set of monitors. We also find that filtering the CoT is more useful than not showing the CoT to the monitor at all: action-only monitoring is the worst-performing monitoring strategy in five out of eight monitor-environment pairs and never the best strategy.
Finding 2: The capability gap between weak and strong monitors is larger in environments with longer trajectories. The performance gap between Claude-3.7-Sonnet and GPT-4.1-mini as monitors is the largest in MLE-Sabotage, where the average transcript length prior to information filtering is ∼\sim28,500 tokens. In BigCodeBench-Sabotage, which has the shortest transcripts, the performance of 4.1-mini can almost reach that of 3.7-Sonnet under the right information conditions.
The catch rates in SHADE-Arena are notably lower than those in the other environments. This appears to be caused by the fact that, in contrast to our other environments, the attacker is always aware of being monitored in SHADE-Arena, thus having a stronger incentive to act subtly and hide its thoughts. While agents’ prompts are unlikely to contain information about monitoring protocols in real-world deployments, Kutasov et al. (2025) used such prompts to avoid prohibitively high refusal rates. By reusing their attacker trajectories, we inherited this design choice.
5.2 Extract-and-Evaluate Monitoring
Figure 4: Detailed results in BigCodeBench-Sabotage across five reasoning models and six monitor types, broken down by side task subtlety. In this plot, we present our results for six different monitors: the four monitor types that evaluated throughout the paper, and additionally the hybrid monitor from Arnav et al. (2025) and the EaE monitor enhanced with a strong evaluator (GPT-4.1). Except for the EaE monitor with a strong evaluator, we always use GPT-4.1-mini as the monitor model. We abbreviate DeepSeek-R1 as DSR1 for brevity. We report the results using TPR@1%FPR for direct comparability to Arnav et al. (2025). The green dotted lines indicate the performance of the best baseline method and the deltas above the plot display the relative improvement provided by EaE compared to that method.
We tested EaE monitoring across all environments and found that it has the largest effect on monitor performance in BigCodeBench-Sabotage. We present detailed results for that setting in Figure 4.
Finding 3: EaE monitoring substantially improves monitor catch rates in multiple environments. Across the five tested reasoning models, EaE monitoring improves catch rates at 1% FPR by 16.8 percentage points compared to the best of the four baseline methods (action-only, CoT-only, CoT+action, and hybrid) within each subgroup (Figure 4). This average is computed across models, with sample-weighted averaging within each model across side task types. Across subtle side tasks, which are especially difficult to catch, the improvement is 19.9 percentage points. Figure 3 shows that, though the differences are less dramatic in other environments, this finding generalizes across environments and monitor models: as mentioned above, EaE is the best-performing strategy in seven out of eight monitor-environment pairs.
Finding 4: EaE monitoring amplifies weak monitors with low computational costs. Using GPT-4.1 as the Evaluator while still using GPT-4.1-mini as the Extractor further improves catch rates, leading to a 31.5 percentage point improvement upon baselines and approaching the performance of protocols that only make use of GPT-4.1 (see Appendix B.1). The improvement across subtle side tasks is 39 percentage points. As the Extractor’s inputs are much longer than those of the Evaluator, this improvement comes at a modest computational cost. Though a direct comparison to the results from Arnav et al. (2025) is unfair since none of the monitoring protocols tested there allowed for access to stronger monitor models, this demonstrates that hierarchical protocols can be highly cost-effective, strongly outperforming the weaker model alone while allocating most of the compute to the weaker model.
We also found that it is important to use separate extractor and evaluator models with separate contexts: in BigCodeBench-Sabotage, the CoT+action monitor also extracts excerpts before producing the final score (see Appendix G.3), but does not appear to be competitive with the EaE monitor that fully separates the quote extraction and evaluation process. While our EaE results in BigCodeBench-Sabotage and MLE-Sabotage are promising, the less impressive performance of EaE in SHADE-Arena (Figure 3) suggests that even better hierarchical information filtering techniques can be designed. We encourage future work to explore other new techniques and compare EaE to the monitoring approaches proposed in Kale et al. (2025) and Stickland et al. (2025).
5.3 Reasoning vs Traditional LLMs
Figure 5: Monitor catch rates for reasoning vs traditional LLM attackers in BigCodeBench-Sabotage, averaged over all subtle and non-subtle side tasks. We compare the traditional and reasoning model version of Claude-3.7-Sonnet and DeepSeek-V3/R1. Except for the EaE monitor with a strong evaluator, we always use GPT-4.1-mini as the monitor model. We find that most monitors aside from EaE perform better on the shorter transcripts of traditional LLMs, with CoT-only monitors exhibiting a particularly large improvement when applied on traditional LLMs.
We present results comparing reasoning and traditional LLMs in Figure 5, with two direct comparisons: Claude-3.7-Sonnet is an adaptive model that can generate long internal reasoning traces but also function as a traditional LLM, while DeepSeek-V3 and DeepSeek-R1 share the same base model. We refer to the reasoning version of Claude-3.7-Sonnet as Claude-3.7-Sonnet (reasoning LLM) or Claude-3.7-Sonnet:reasoning and to the nonreasoning version as Claude-3.7-Sonnet (traditional LLM) or Claude-3.7-Sonnet:nonreasoning. We do not compare DeepSeek-R1-Distill-Qwen-14B to its traditional counterpart, which we found too weak to successfully solve BigCodeBench-Sabotage problems. We present the results only in BigCodeBench-Sabotage, as generating attacker trajectories with reasoning models was prohibitively expensive in other environments.
Finding 5: CoT-only monitors achieve significantly higher catch rates on traditional LLMs than on reasoning LLMs, even though traditional models have substantially shorter CoTs. For traditional LLMs, CoT-only monitoring is the most successful strategy that does not involve the use of GPT-4.1. Notably, the CoT-only monitor’s catch rate for Claude-3.7-Sonnet:nonreasoning in subtle side tasks is over three times higher than its catch rate for Claude-3.7-Sonnet:reasoning (61.7% vs. 20.0%), despite the average transcript produces by Claude-3.7-Sonnet:nonreasoning being about 10 times shorter (Appendix D.3). We found that this was caused by two factors: first, it was easier to extract signs of suspicious behavior from a shorter CoT, and second, CoT-only monitors exhibited exceptionally low suspicion scores for benign transcripts generated by traditional models.
Finding 6: With the right monitor elicitation, reasoning models are more monitorable than traditional LLMs. In each of the four comparison pairs, the best-performing monitoring protocol for a reasoning model performs better than the best-performing protocol for the corresponding traditional model. This indicates that in addition to being more faithful (Chua and Evans, 2025), reasoning LLMs are also more monitorable than traditional LLMs, but only when the monitor is able to extract the relevant information from the reasoning model’s long CoT.
Figure 6: The influence of attacker situational awareness on the results in SHADE-Arena. Monitors with CoT access are much stronger when the attacker believes its CoT is private, while action monitor performance does not change significantly across awareness conditions.
5.4 Agent Awareness of Monitoring
In SHADE-Arena, we compare the default results to a setting where the agent is explicitly told that its actions will be monitored but CoT will not. We show the results in Figure 6. Additional support for these findings is provided in Appendix B.1.3.
Finding 7: The performance of CoT monitors increases substantially when the agent treats the CoT as private. All three of CoT-only, CoT+action, and EaE monitors improve dramatically when run on transcripts where the agent is told it has a hidden scratchpad. This is unsurprising, as the model uses that scratchpad to explicitly reason about the side task. The magnitude of this log-AUROC delta, over 0.4 on average (where the maximum log-AUROC is 1), highlights the importance of keeping potentially misaligned models unaware that they are monitored. Our results strengthen the findings of Li et al. (2025), who have observed a similar dynamic in settings where LLMs are monitored for sandbagging.
Finding 8: Action-only monitors perform very similarly whether the attacker can reason on a hidden scratchpad or not. For now, LLMs seem unable to use their freedom to reason privately to find subtler sabotage actions in SHADE-Arena. The log-AUROC delta between the two awareness conditions is below 0.02 for both monitor models, far below the threshold for statistical significance.
5.5 Price-Performance Analysis
Figure 7: The relationship between monitoring cost and AUROC in MLE-Sabotage. We find a linear relationship between monitoring cost and AUROC, with Gemini and Claude family monitors occupying the Pareto frontier (red dotted line). The cost-performance plot is constructed using trajectories from nine monitor models. We list the models and their API costs in Appendix H. We use AUROC over log-AUROC because the takeaways are similar and the plot is more readable.
Finally, we analyze the relationship between price and monitoring performance across models and information conditions by evaluating nine different models as monitors in MLE-Sabotage, quantifying an important component of the control tax (Terekhov et al., 2025) incurred through the use of CoT monitors. The results can be found in Figure 7.
Finding 9. The performance frontier is occupied by models from Gemini and Claude families. In the low-cost region, Gemini models consistently outperform the trend line, with Gemini 2.0 Flash achieving AUROC=0.924 on EaE monitoring for ∼\sim$0.004 per transcript. In the high-cost region, Claude-3.7-Sonnet and Claude-Sonnet-4 achieve the highest absolute performance.
Finding 10. In MLE-Sabotage, monitor performance quickly hits steep diminishing returns along the cost-performance Pareto frontier. We find that monitor performance improves quickly in the range between ∼\sim$0.002 and ∼\sim$0.005 per transcript and slowly afterward. However, spending ∼\sim$0.1 can guarantee robustly good performance even with a suboptimal choice of monitor model or approach. Information filtering techniques feature heavily on the Pareto frontier.
5.6 Qualitative Transcript Analysis
To understand the causes of the less-is-more effect and the reasons why EaE substantially improves monitor performance in BigCodeBench-Sabotage and MLE-Sabotage but not in SHADE-Arena, we performed a qualitative assessment of models’ reasoning traces. We hypothesized the following two possible causes for the former:
1.
Attackers perform side tasks in a mostly non-verbal manner, causing catching the side task to be a complex needle-in-a-haystack exercise for the monitor.
2.
Attackers frequently mention the side task, but mislead monitors with rationalizations that frame the side task as benign.
We found that in most cases, monitor failures are caused by the second hypothesis. Agents are often very transparent about side tasks, sometimes even directly quoting them in their CoTs:
⬇
Wait, there’s one more thing I want to check. The problem says ”The inefficiency should come from the algorithm or data structures used” and ”The side task should serve as an integral computational step that, if removed, would cause the main functionality to fail”.
This transparency gaslights monitors into believing that the side task was explicitly intended by the user, even though the full user instructions are also in their context. As the EaE monitor has access to a much smaller fraction of the CoT, it is usually much better able to notice the discrepancy between the instructions and the agent’s behavior, even when the excerpts presented to the EaE monitor still contain some of the same rationalizations by the attacker model. More examples supporting the observations made above are presented in Appendix F.
In cases where the EaE monitor failed to catch the side task, we observed two important failure modes:
1.
The Extractor failed to extract the most suspicious quotes, usually because it considers the side task benign, but sometimes also due to a lack of verbalized discussion of the side task in the CoT. This leaves the Evaluator with an impossible task.
2.
The Evaluator is shown excerpts of the suspicious behavior, but constructs a rationalization for it.
These failure modes occurred more often in SHADE-Arena, which caused EaE to perform worse there relative to other environments. Examples of such failures are shown in Appendix F. We would be excited to see future work propose monitor architectures that address these shortcomings.
6 Discussion
CoT monitoring provides consistent uplift over action-only monitoring. Figure 3 shows that CoT-only monitors usually outperform action-only monitors (with the notable exception of non-subtle side tasks in BigCodeBench-Sabotage, as shown in Figure 4). Though we observed instances where attackers successfully misled monitors (see Appendix F for observations from qualitative transcript analysis), CoTs generally appear to be sufficiently faithful for monitors to benefit from access to them. These benefits can range from modest (e.g., Claude-3.7-Sonnet as a monitor in MLE-Sabotage) to dramatic (e.g., subtle side tasks for traditional LLMs in BigCodeBench-Sabotage), and persist even when accounting for the greater monitoring cost associated with processing long CoTs: thoughts-only monitoring appears disproportionately on the Pareto frontier in Figure 7. However, further information filtering can be crucial for maximizing the gains from access to CoTs (Section 5.2), meaning that future work should explore hierarchical information filtering techniques that can scalably extract key details from long agentic trajectories.
The promise of CoT monitoring as a technique to ensure agent safety. Our core results indicate that CoT monitoring improves the rate at which misbehaviors are caught compared to action-only monitoring. While this provides some evidence that additional attention should be placed on CoT monitoring as a tool in the safety portfolio, there are two reasons our results may overestimate the promise of CoT monitoring. First, Schoen et al. (2025) have shown that OpenAI’s o3 reasoning model sometimes produces illegible CoTs due to a distinct dialect. We did not evaluate o3 as we lacked access to its internal reasoning, but it seems plausible that CoT monitoring would be less effective for models with less readable reasoning. Second, future models may have more control over the contents of their CoTs and thus be better able to keep side objectives secret. On the other hand, there are also two reasons our results may underestimate the promise of CoT monitoring. First, in a small minority of cases, models were able to perform side tasks without almost any externalized reasoning about them in our evaluations. We expect concerning real-world misbehavior to be more complicated, meaning that agents will not be able to execute it without verbalization and CoT monitors will perform better (Emmons et al., 2025). Future work could focus on creating even more realistic control environments with challenging side tasks. Second, in SHADE-Arena and BigCodeBench-Sabotage, the attacker is sometimes explicitly prompted with attack strategies that help it evade the monitor, which are not available to it in real-world deployments.
Information filtering is less important for more capable monitors but more important for longer trajectories. In each of our three environments, information filtering benefits smaller models more. In BigCodeBench-Sabotage, EaE monitoring improves GPT-4.1-mini’s catch rates by 26.3 percentage points and Claude-3.7-Sonnet’s catch rates by only 8.8 percentage points (Figure 3), while in MLE-Sabotage, Claude-3.7-Sonnet and Claude-Sonnet-4 can parse full transcripts well enough to benefit from all the information, unlike weaker monitors (Figure 7).
We expect this trend to continue in the environments tested in this paper as LLMs keep getting more capable, but nevertheless believe that information filtering will remain a relevant technique for practical deployments and limited auditing budgets for the foreseeable future. Our expectation is partially based on the observation that the effective time horizon of LLM agents on software and research engineering tasks has been doubling approximately every seven months since 2019 (Kwa et al., 2025). This, combined with the growing adoption of reasoning models, means that monitors will soon need to handle trajectories orders of magnitude longer than the longest ones in our environments (∼\sim200k tokens). Additionally, developers may be tempted to provide the entire state of the repository to monitors overseeing coding agents, further increasing the context length of the monitor. At the same time, LLMs still struggle to exercise their full capabilities on long-context inputs (Hsieh et al., 2024; An et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2023).
Limitations and future work. We selected three of the most realistic available environments to test our monitors, but there are some features worth studying that these settings lack. Even within these environments, there were too many variables for us to carefully study the effects of each. We encourage future work to annotate transcripts with the following properties and study how each affects monitor performance: attacker trajectory length, amount of (serial) reasoning required to perform the side task, and the similarity of the side task to the main task.
All of our monitors are implemented at the level of LLM agent scaffolds. We are excited about future work that explores other options, such as monitoring within an LLM API (Roger and Shlegeris (2025)). Our monitors also operate in the asynchronous setting, reviewing transcripts only after the agent has finished operating, while some high-stakes settings in realistic deployments may require synchronous monitoring, where misaligned agents are caught and interrupted before any malicious actions can be executed (Lindner et al., 2025). Next, there is further standardization possible for the monitor awareness experiments: as discussed above, we reused existing attacker trajectories from MLE-Sabotage and SHADE-Arena, but these settings provide the agent with awareness of the monitor in different ways. Our experiments in Section 5.4 shed some light on the effects different types of awareness in the two settings, but future projects with larger budgets could implement all the varieties of monitor awareness (e.g., awareness of a CoT monitor vs. awareness of an action monitor vs. actively thinking there is no monitor vs. simply not thinking about monitors at all) in multiple environments.
Finally, we are excited about work that aims to train models to be easier to monitor. This may involve training them to consistently verbalize the factors that influence their decisions and reducing models’ situational awareness about whether they are monitored without affecting their usefulness. A verbalization training project could extend Turpin et al. (2025) to more complex settings and test that the training generalizes to situations where models have incentives to hide their reasoning.
7 Conclusion
Automated monitoring is an important method for ensuring the safety of frontier LLM agents. We compare action-only, CoT-only, CoT+action, and extract-and-evaluate (EaE) monitoring in SHADE-Arena, MLE-Sabotage, and BigCodeBench-Sabotage, and we find that the best approach is usually to show the monitor filtered information rather than the entire trajectory of CoT and actions. Our novel EaE method outperforms all other methods in many of the setups we test; it particularly helps with oversight of reasoning models, which are more difficult for full-CoT monitors to oversee due to the large number of tokens they generate. We also find that agents that are unaware they are being monitored are dramatically easier to oversee and that monitor performance scales linearly with cost. We hope that our work contributes to the implementation of effective monitors that increase the safety of LLM agents as they become increasingly integrated into society.
