Exact-v1 primary necessary selection https://arxiv.org/html/2601.21725v1
3 Preliminaries
We use the following terminology throughout this paper.
•
Procedural pretraining: the initial exposition of a language model to procedural data,
before other stages such as standard pretraining with semantic data.
•
Procedural data: data generated from a simple algorithm, for example
formal languages, cellular automata, or other simple algorithms described in
Section 3.2.
•
Semantic data: as opposed to procedural data,
standard data used to train language models, for example natural language, computer code, or informal mathematics.
3.1 Experimental Setup
We train GPT-2-type decoder-only transformers from scratch
with a standard next-token prediction objective (Radford et al., 2019) (see Appendices C & E for details.).
When pretraining on procedural data that involves input/output pairs (Section 3.2), we compute the loss only on output tokens.
Apart from Section 6, each experiment uses a single type of procedural data.
Data setup. We first train each model on T1T_{1} procedural tokens,
then on T2T_{2} standard tokens from the target data.
The target data is either an algorithmic task in Section 4 for diagnostic purpose,
or a semantic dataset in Section 5 reflecting standard training practices.
The baseline is considered as the same model trained with no procedural data (T1=0T_{1}=0).
We adjust T1T_{1} and T2T_{2} following either of these two settings.
•
Additive setting. We keep T2T_{2} fixed and vary T1T_{1} to measure the performance gain of additional procedural tokens. This evaluates whether procedural data provides a training signal that semantic data alone does not impart.
•
Substitutive setting. We reduce T2T_{2} while increasing
T1T_{1} (by a much smaller amount) to match the baseline performance.
This evaluates how procedural pretraining can be a cheaper substitute for standard pretraining.
Weight setup. All the weights of the model are trained in both procedural pretraining and any subsequent training stages, i.e. nothing is frozen.
Each experiment uses either of the two following transfer settings
between the two phases.
•
Full-model transfer. The standard practice, i.e. using all procedurally-pretrained weights.22
2
In Sections 5 and 6
we reinitialise the token embeddings to random values since there is no correspondence between the vocabularies of procedural and semantic data. In
Section 4
(procedural →\!\rightarrow\! algorithmic transfer), we instead initialise embeddings to the mean vector, as there is no semantic domain shift.
•
Selective attention-only or MLP-only transfer.
We only use the pretrained weights of selected layers and reinitialize
others to random values.
This evaluates where useful pretrained information is stored,
motivated by the evidence that MLP and attention layers perform different computations
(Dong et al., 2025; Xu and Chen, 2025).
3.2 Generating Procedural Data
Each type of procedural data is defined by a data-generating algorithm.
We use algorithms that produce structurally rich data
where next-token prediction requires precise symbol manipulation, compositional reasoning, and/or long-range dependency tracking.
We selected these from prior work
and we also introduce a novel one (Stack).
Each takes hyperparameters detailed in Appendix B.
•
Sequence transformations. A random sequence is presented and the model must predict its transformed version (Wu et al., 2022).
This includes
Set (token deduplication),
Reverse (reversing the input),
Identity (copying the input),
Union (ordered combination of two sequences with duplicates removed),
Sort (copy in ascending order)
and
Delete (removal of a specified token).
•
Memory operations. Stack simulates a stack memory, tracking state over a random series of push and pop operations. The model must predict the final
memory contents from top to bottom.
•
Formal languages.
We use classical formal languages for balanced parentheses
(Hu et al., 2025; Papadimitriou and Jurafsky, 2023),
k-Dyck (nested) and k-Dyck Shuffle (non-nested).
The model is trained for next-token prediction to generate sequences from the target language, and we vary kk to control the complexity of the nesting.
•
Cellular automata.
We use the elementary cellular automaton Eca rule 110 following
Zhang et al. (2024), where a binary sequence evolves via deterministic Markovian dynamics.
Each sequence describes a random state of the ECA and the model must predict the next state.
4 Probing Procedural Pretraining with Algorithmic Reasoning
We first train small transformers (two layers, four attention heads) on
specific types of procedural data,
then fine-tune them on algorithmic tasks to evaluate how specific types of procedural data improve the following skills
(training and test data are i.i.d.; full details in Appendix D).
•
Memory recall. The needle-in-a-haystack task (Haystack) evaluates long-context retrieval.
Each input has 30 key–value pairs ([m1,c1,…,mk,ck,mu])([m_{1},c_{1},\ldots,m_{k},c_{k},m_{u}]) and a query marker mum_{u};
the model must output the associated value cuc_{u}. Accuracy is measured on the retrieved token.
•
Arithmetic. We evaluate three tasks.
Addition sums two 5-digit integers (a+b=), requiring right-to-left carry propagation, opposite to the autoregressive order.
Reversed addition uses 10-digit numbers with reversed inputs and outputs, aligning carries with autoregression.
Multiplication computes the product of two 5-digit integers (a×\timesb=), predicting only result digits.
All tasks are tokenized per digit, and the accuracy is measured over the output digits.
•
Logical and relational processing. With Sorting, the model receives 1010
integers from [0,99][0,\!99] and a separator, and outputs the sorted sequence.
The accuracy is computed on the output tokens.
4.1 Which Algorithmic Skills Improve with Procedural Pretraining?
Setup. We use the additive settings in Section 3.1: for every combination of a type of procedural data
and algorithmic task, we train on T1T_{1} procedural tokens then T2T_{2} tokens of the algorithmic task. The baseline model uses T1=0T_{1}\!=\!0.
mmmHaystack
mmmAddition
mmmReversed add.
mmmMultiplication
mmmSorting
Figure 2:
Different types of procedural pretraining can significantly improve over standard training (dashed line) across various algorithmic tasks.
If we remove the structure within the procedural data by shuffling the sequences
(Best model shuffled), the performance falls to the baseline.
Reported values are the means over 10 seeds (full results with variance in Appendix N.1).
Results.
Figure 2 shows that many types of procedural data
significantly improve performance on various tasks.
The best type of procedural data varies across task.
For example, pretraining on k-Dyck improves context recall and Haystack,
while Eca rule 110 benefits Reversed Addition.
This indicates that each type of procedural data improves different skills.
We also evaluate the best model pretrained on randomly shuffled procedural sequences.
This conserves the token distribution within sequences while disrupting their structure
(Best model shuffled in Figure 2).
The performance subsequently drops back to baseline.
This shows that
the structure in the procedural data is essential.
Take-away. Among different types of procedural data, each improves specific algorithmic skills.
4.2 Where does the Pretrained Information Reside?
Setup. We use the selective transfer settings defined in Section 3.1 to probe where useful information is encoded in the pretrained model.
We repeat the experiments from
Section 4.1
with either attention-only or MLP-only transfer and compare their performance to full-transfer
to identify which component retains the most benefit.
mHaystack
mmAddition
mmReversed addition
mmmSorting
Figure 3: Selective transfer of MLP or attention layers
can improve over full-model transfer,
showing that procedural pretraining creates ‘modular’ structure
localised in the selected model components. Reported values are means across 10 seeds (full results with variance in Appendix N.1).
Results.
Figure 3 shows
surprisingly
that selective transfer can be superior to full-model transfer.
For instance, with the Identity / Haystack pair,
attention-only gives an 8080-percentage point improvement over full-model transfer.
This means that useful information is encoded in the attention layers,
and that the other pretrained components (MLPs) contain non-transferable structure.
Across the different tasks, the attention layers are the most consistent carrier of useful information, with the exception of Reversed addition, where MLP-only and full-model are superior.
Take-away.
Procedural pretraining creates localised skills in specific components of the architecture. Transferring specific components can be more effective than transferring the entire model.
4.3 Are There Simple Explanations for the Benefits of Pretraining?
We next examine potential mechanisms underlying the improvements from procedural pretraining.
See Appendix F for full details and results.
Explanation 1: attention sharpening. We observe that pretrained models have sharp attention patterns, and transferring only the sharpest attention heads preserves or even exceeds the performance of transferring all of them.
One possibility is thus that pretraining creates a generic “sharpening” of the attention (Liu et al., 2023) with no relevance to precise patterns.
However, training models with an explicit regularizer for sharper attentions does not replicate the benefits of procedural pretraining. This shows that precise attention patterns do matter.
Explanation 2: initialisation scale. Another explanation is that pretraining simply adjusts the magnitude of initial weights (Huang et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2022).
We test this using the best models from
Section 4.1,
and shuffle the weights per layer, such that the distributions of magnitudes are preserved
but their structures erased.
As expected, Figure 13 in the appendix
shows that the accuracy drops dramatically. We also observe a rapid drop in accuracy with the gradual addition of Gaussian noise to the weights.
This shows that pretrained weights encode meaningful structure.
Take-away. The benefits of procedural pretraining are encoded in precise weight structure. They cannot be explained by a simple rescaling of the weights or generic regularisation of the attention.
5 Can Procedural Data Complement or Replace Standard Data?
This section examines the practical benefits of procedural pretraining.
In Section 5.1,
we use single-domain datasets (natural language and pure code)
to evaluate the transfer of algorithmic skills (Section 4)
across domains.
In Section 5.2,
we turn to larger pretraining corpora including natural language mixed with code and informal mathematics.
5.1 Domain-Specific Corpora
Setup.
We use WikiText (Merity et al., 2016) and Github’s JavaCorpus (Allamanis and Sutton, 2013) as domain-specific
datasets of natural language and undocumented code.
We train GPT-2-small models from scratch on these datasets after
initial pretraining on procedural data (full-model transfer).
We repeat this with different amounts of procedural tokens T1T_{1}
(additive setting).
Results.
Figure 4 shows that procedural pretraining significantly outperforms the baseline for both natural language and code.
Surprisingly, the improvement is not clearly correlated with the amount of procedural pretraining tokens (T1T_{1}) and small amounts of pretraining proves sufficient.
Data generated with Union and Set help both domains, while Sort
only helps with natural language.
Additional results in Appendix G
show that the sequence length and the number of pretraining steps, both controlling T1T_{1}, influence the effectiveness of different types of procedural data.
Figure 4:
The benefits of procedural pretraining transfer to semantic domains.
Perplexity (lower is better) on natural language
(left)
and pure code
(right).
A little of procedural data is very effective:
compare the number of procedural tokens (T1T_{1}) in these plots
with the amount of tokens from the target datasets
(T2T_{2}) being 15M for WikiText
and 105M for JavaCorpus.
Take-away. The benefits of procedural pretraining transfer from abstract algorithmic skills to semantic domains, and they only require relatively small amounts of data.
5.2 Larger Pretraining Corpora
Figure 5:
Procedural pretraining is complementary to standard data & highly data-efficient.
Each column corresponds to a different semantic dataset.
(Top) Training curves with different types of procedural data (Union, Sort, Set).
(Middle) Additive setting: a small amount of procedural data is sufficient to outperform standard pretraining. (Bottom) Substitutive setting: we plot curves whose points (x,y)(x,y)
achieve equivalent performance with xx procedural tokens and yy standard tokens.
We can drastically reduce the total amount of data when using a small fraction of procedural data.
Full-model transfer (see Section 3.1) is used for procedural pretraining.
Setup.
We expand the evaluation to more diverse and larger datasets to evaluate whether
the knowledge gained from procedural pretraining is complementary to the information typically acquired from these.
We use several standard pretraining datasets for natural language
(C4, Raffel et al. (2020)), code (CodeParrot, HuggingFace (2022)), and informal mathematics (DeepMind-Math, Saxton et al. (2019), the math portion of The Pile, Gao et al. (2020)).
Much of the prior work (see Section 2) has been limited to natural language, we additionally consider informal mathematics and code because they also constitute an important part of standard pretraining corpora.
We also hypothesize that they are well-suited for substantial gains from procedural pretraining due to their strong structural regularities similar to procedural data.
We use the best-performing procedural data types (Union, Sort, Set) identified in Figure 4 (Section 5.1).
We train CodeParrot-small–style models (HuggingFace, 2022) from scratch.
Each model is first pretrained on T1T_{1} procedural tokens (0–20M), followed by standard pretraining on T2T_{2} tokens from one of the above datasets (655M, 1B, or 1.6B).
We evaluate both additive and substitutive settings.
In the additive setting, we measure absolute performance gains from the T1T_{1} procedural tokens.
In the substitutive setting, we quantify semantic-token savings Δ​T2\Delta T_{2} such that training on (T2−Δ​T2)(T_{2}-\Delta T_{2}) semantic tokens with T1T_{1} procedural tokens matches the performance of a T2T_{2}-only model.
Results. Figure 5 (top) shows that procedural pretraining accelerates and improves subsequent pretraining.
The additive setting (middle) demonstrates that the benefits from procedural pretraining
only require a small amount of data, and that additional data is not always beneficial.
In all cases, a small amount of additional procedural tokens (2–4M) clearly outperform the baseline.
For reference, 2.1M procedural tokens correspond respectively
to 0.3%, 0.2%, and 0.1% of each of the three semantic datasets.
The substitutive setting (bottom) shows that procedural tokens can efficiently substitute for large amounts of semantic tokens.
For example, with C4, we can maintain the baseline loss and save about 45% of semantic tokens (∼\sim365M) by using only 2.1M procedural tokens.
In Appendix L, we further examine how the effects of
procedural pretraining scale with both model size (350M and 1.3B parameter models) and data size (up to 10B tokens). The larger models
continue to exhibit clear and consistent improvements from procedural pretraining on a larger scale.
Small datasets
Larger datasets
Figure 6: Localisation of transferable pretrained information
for different semantic domains.
(Top)
Using selective weight transfer (see Section 3.1),
we find that MLPs and attention layers are important respectively for natural language
and pure code, across different types of procedural data.
(Bottom)
On larger datasets,
MLP-only transfer works best for language.
As expected, full transfer
is optimal for domains involving both
language and structured data (documented code, informal mathematics).
Do the benefits persist after downstream fine-tuning? We further evaluate if the above benefits from procedural pretraining remain after downstream
fine-tuning, the primary indicator of practical model utility. Following semantic pretraining,
we fine-tune both the baseline and our models on representative language
(WikiText-103 (Merity et al., 2016), GLUE (Wang et al., 2019)) and code completion
(PY150 (Lu et al., 2021)) datasets. As detailed in Appendix M, the improvements from procedural
pretraining consistently persist after downstream fine-tuning.
Take-away. Procedural pretraining is complementary to standard pretraining on semantic datasets in multiple domains.
It is also highly data-efficient and allows one to drastically reduce the total amount of data needed to reach a given perplexity level.
5.3 Localisation of the Transferable Pretrained Information
Setup.
Similar to section 4.2, we use selective weight transfer (attention-/MLP-only)
to locate where the useful, transferable information resides in the procedurally-pretrained model, for the semantic domains considered so far.
Note that we consider JavaCorpus and CodeParrot
as different domains since they respectively contain pure and documented code
(i.e. interleaved with natural language).
Results. Figure 6
shows that on JavaCorpus (pure code), transferring only the attention layers yields the largest gains in both perplexity and code-completion accuracy (Figure 20).
On WikiText and C4 (natural language), the opposite holds, and transferring the MLPs is most effective.
This suggests that procedural pretraining induces distinct inductive biases in different components, and selectively transferring the right component can further improve upon the results from Figure 5.
For domains that combine natural language with structured data, i.e. documented code and informal math (CodeParrot and DeepMind-Math), full-model transfer performs best by combining the benefits from both MLPs for natural language, and attention for structured data.
These effects are intriguing given that MLPs are believed to
store of factual information in LLMs
(Dong et al., 2025; Geva et al., 2020; Xu and Chen, 2025), raising the question of how procedural pretraining improves MLPs for handling
natural language with only abstract data.
In Appendix N.2, we further explore the benefits of MLP-only transfer for language on syntactic and morphological competence. We show that MLP-only transfer achieves a better downstream accuracy on BLiMP (Warstadt et al., 2020) in the additive setting. In the substitutive setting, it requires even fewer C4 tokens to reach the same perplexity level than full-model transfer (42% vs. 55%).
Take-away.
Procedural pretraining instils useful transferable information in both MLPs and attention layers.
MLP benefit natural language while attention layers support structured domains such as code and mathematics.
6 Combining Multiple Types of Procedural Data
Our experiments and most prior work on procedural data
have so far used a single type of such data at a time.
Combining the strength of multiple procedural data is promising but not trivial because of their varying levels of learning difficulty.
This section explore two techniques to combine the
complementary benefits of multiple types of procedural data
by building on the findings from
Section 4–5.
6.1 Data Mixtures
Setup. A natural approach is to pretrain on mixtures of procedural data
in chosen ratios.
We evaluate pairs of procedural data AA and BB
that we mix using TAT_{A} and TBT_{B} tokens of each, such that T1=TA+TBT_{1}=T_{A}+T_{B} is fixed.
We prefix each pretraining sequence with an extra token specifies which of AA or BB it belongs.
We train a model on these T1T_{1} tokens then on T2T_{2} tokens from either JavaCorpus or WikiText.
Figure 7: Mixtures of two types of procedural data.
We vary the proportion of
Set and Union
(indicated by the small pie charts)
while keeping the total number of procedural token T1T_{1} fixed.
Some choices achieve a clearly better perplexity (lower is better) than either of the two types alone.
Results. Figure 7 shows that many mixtures, each with different mixture ratios shown by the pie chart and entropy of ratios, outperform the best single-source baselines for attention transfer on JavaCorpus and full-model transfer on WikiText (the best settings identified in Section 5.3).
This proof of concept
shows that the benefits of multiple types of data are cumulative,
and suggest potential for further gains with optimized combinations of additional sources.
6.2 Weight Mixtures
We evaluate an alternative method that builds on the findings from
Sections 4.3 & 5.3
about the localisation of pretrained information in distinct layers (attention vs. MLPs).
We propose to compose a new model by assembling components from several pretrained models.
This avoids the challenge of balancing data mixtures.
Setup. We assemble a model with the attention layers of a pretrained Set model and the MLPs of an ECA Rule 110 model.
We chose these because they showed distinct and complementary capabilities (see Haystack and Reversed addition in Table 6.2).
We then further train this model on
the algorithmic evaluation tasks of Section 4.
Results. The last row of Table 6.2 shows that the combined model yields superior performance across the four tasks,
while the single-source models have weaknesses on one or more tasks.
This indicates that
procedurally-pretrained models
can be modularly combined by simply assembling their most useful components.
Haystack
Addition
Reversed addition
Sort
Avg.
No procedural pretraining
11.3
59.1
76.4
82.7
57.4
Set (full-model transfer)
18.9
53.4
44.6
93.5
52.6
Set (attention-only transfer)
88.9
81.1
54.4
98.1
80.6
ECA (full-model transfer)
10.5
69.6
91.0
76.9
62.0
ECA (MLP-only transfer)
8.71
63.1
70.5
77.1
54.9
Set (attention) + ECA (MLP)
94.4
80.3
82.9
99.4
89.3
Table 1: Pretrained models combined at the weight level.
We combine Set-pretrained attention layers with ECA-pretrained MLPs (last row).
This yields strong performance across all four tasks, whereas single-source models show weaknesses in at least one task. Full results with variance in Table 13.
Take-away. The effects of multiple types of procedural data
are additive. Proof-of-concept experiments show that they can be combined both at data- and weight-level, and suggest ample room for further benefits with larger and more-optimized combinations.
E.1 Procedural Pretraining
Details for Section 4.
The hyperparameters used for procedural pretraining are summarised in Table 2, with the exception of ECA Rule 110, whose configuration is reported separately below.
Task
Seq. length
Learning rate
Vocab. size
Identity
4–20
5×10−45\times 10^{-4}
102
Set
2–20
5×10−45\times 10^{-4}
102
Stack
4–20
5×10−45\times 10^{-4}
103
kk-Dyck
128
5×10−55\times 10^{-5}
2×k2\times k
kk-Dyck Shuffle
128
5×10−55\times 10^{-5}
2×k2\times k
Table 2:
Pretraining hyperparameters for each procedural task. All models use AdamW with weight decay 0.010.01, batch size 256256, and run for 1,000,0001{,}000{,}000 steps. Early stopping (100 validation checks) is applied for the algorithmic tasks.
ECA Rule 110. Following Zhang et al. (2024), we pretrain models on data procedurally generated from Elementary Cellular Automata under Rule 110.
Each epoch begins from a new random initial state, ensuring continual access to fresh samples and effectively unlimited training data.
Models are trained for up to 10,000 epochs with early stopping on validation loss.
We use Adam with a learning rate of 2×10−62\times 10^{-6}, weight decay 0.010.01, and gradient clipping at norm 1.01.0, with batch size 64 (60 time steps, 100 spatial dimensions).
The learning rate schedule consists of a 10% warm-up phase followed by cosine decay.
Detail for Section 5.
For all algorithmic procedural tasks used in this section (Identity, Set, Union, Delete, Sort, Reverse, and Stack),
we train using AdamW with a batch size of 64 and no warmup steps.
Following Hu et al. (2025), we pretrain models on procedural data with a weight decay of 0.1 for Wikitext and C4, and use 0.01 for JavaCorpus, CodeParrot, and DeepMind-Math. The pretrained models are subsequently fine-tuned on their respective downstream datasets.
An ablation study in Appendix K confirms that this choice of weight decay during pretraining does not affect our conclusions.
We sweep sequence lengths over {8,16,32,64}\{8,16,32,64\} and vary the number of procedural pretraining steps between 100 and 2500.
No warmup or learning rate decay is applied; instead, we train with a fixed learning rate throughout.
For consistency, the learning rate during pretraining is matched to that of the downstream semantic objective, as preliminary experiments indicated this setting to be most effective.
E.2 Algorithmic Tasks
Haystack, Forward addition, Reversed addition, and Sorting.
We trained models for 10410^{4} steps with a batch size of 1,000. The training data is generated dynamically. We used the AdamW optimizer with a learning rate of 10−310^{-3} and weight decay of 10−310^{-3}. We always use an architecture consisting of 2 layers, 4 attention heads, and 16-dimensional embeddings. We report mean and standard deviation over 10 seeds in Appendix N.
Multiplication.
These experiments employed a larger model with 4 layers, 8 attention heads, and 512-dimensional embeddings. Thus, we use a smaller training batch size (64 vs. 1,000), resulting in approximately 156k update steps compared to 10k steps for the afforementioned reasoning tasks, despite using the same number of training examples. We optimize with AdamW using a learning rate of 10−310^{-3}, weight decay of 10−310^{-3}, and 500 warmup steps. We run this over 3 seeds, and report standard deviations in Appendix N.
E.3 Semantic Data
WikiText.
We train our models on Wikitext-2 (Merity et al., 2016) using next-token prediction with AdamW. Training runs for ∼\sim7 epochs (5,000 steps) with an effective batch size of 32. We use a learning rate of 5×10−45\times 10^{-4} with cosine decay and no warmup steps.
Sequences are tokenized with the GPT-2 tokenizer, truncated to 1,024 tokens. We evaluate the model on the validation split, using 1,024 samples.
Our primary metric is validation perplexity.
JavaCorpus:
We train our models on Github’s JavaCorpus (Allamanis and Sutton, 2013) using next-token prediction with AdamW. Training runs for 5 epochs with an effective batch size of 8. We use a learning rate of 8×10−58\times 10^{-5} and no warmup steps.
The hyperparameters follow those in (Lu et al., 2021).
Sequences are tokenized with the CodeGPT (Lu et al., 2021) tokenizer, with block size 1,024 tokens. We report validation perplexity and test accuracy for code completion.
C4: We pretrain our models on the C4 dataset (Raffel et al., 2020) using next-token prediction with AdamW.
Training runs for 10,000 steps with an effective batch size of 32.
We use a learning rate of 5×10−45\times 10^{-4} with cosine decay and no warmup steps.
Sequences are tokenized with the GPT-2 tokenizer and truncated to 2,048 tokens.
We evaluate models on the C4 validation split using 1,024 samples, reporting validation perplexity.
To assess linguistic generalization, we also report accuracy on the BLiMP grammaticality judgment benchmark (Warstadt et al., 2020), which tests whether models prefer grammatical over ungrammatical sentence pairs.
CodeParrot: We pretrain our models on the CodeParrot dataset33
3
https://huggingface.co/datasets/codeparrot/codeparrot-clean using next-token prediction with AdamW.
Training runs for 20,000 steps with an effective batch size of 48.
We use a learning rate of 5×10−45\times 10^{-4} with cosine decay, no warmup steps, and weight decay of 0.10.1.
Sequences are tokenized with the CodeParrot’s tokenizer and with length 1,024 tokens.
We evaluate models on the validation split with 1,000 evaluation steps and a batch size of 48, reporting validation loss and perplexity.
Deepmind-Math: We pretrain our models on the Deepmind-Mathematics dataset (Saxton et al., 2019) using next-token prediction with AdamW.
Training runs for 50,000 steps with an effective batch size of 64.
We use a constant learning rate of 8×10−58\times 10^{-5} (as is done in the original paper), no warmup steps, and weight decay of 0.10.1.
Sequences are tokenized at the character-level (including digits, alphabet in upper and lower case, punctuation and whitespace, a total of 95 different tokens) and have a length 512 tokens.
We evaluate models on the in-distribution validation split with 100 evaluation steps and a batch size of 64, reporting the accuracy on the validation problems.
This ensures evaluating around 38,000 questions in each validation session.
A problem is considered correct if and only if the prediction exactly matches the groundtruth answer.
