https://arxiv.org/html/2601.21725v1
Necessary selected supplement; actually read, not full appendix.
7 Discussion
This paper shows that pretraining language models on
well-chosen abstract procedural data complements
standard pretraining, accelerating training and improving performance
on natural language, code, and informal mathematics.
Our experiments also shed light on the origin of these gains. We found that
useful information lies in different components
(MLP vs. attention)
depending on the domain
(language vs. structured domains).
These findings motivate new pretraining paradigms where primitive abstract data is exposed to LLMs before they acquire rich world knowledge.
Efficient initialisation.
Unlike standard data, procedural data has a small Kolmogorov complexity,
meaning that it contains information that can be summarized in
a few lines of code.
In principle, it may be possible to simplify this as a deterministic or closed-form smart initialisation of LLMs.
Why is procedural data helpful?
Our results in Section 4.3 rule out simple explanations, indicating deeper effects than merely a better optimisation dynamics or memorisation.
Investigating a first-principles explanation or studying the mechanisms at play
using mechanistic interpretability techniques (Conmy et al., 2023) is a promising avenue.
Combining multiple types of procedural data.
We showed that the benefits can be additive. Existing methods for
data mixture optimization (Fan et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2025)
could be adapted to optimally balance multiple types of procedural data.
Knowledge vs. reasoning.
Han et al. (2025) argue that LLMs’ limitations stem from
entangled representations of knowledge and reasoning.
Our work can be viewed as injecting an ‘algorithmic reasoning prior’ before world-knowledge acquisition.
This ultimately suggests a data-driven path in improving knowledge and reasoning acquisition beyond architectural changes (Pouransari et al., 2025).
Limitations.
(1) We use smaller models (up to 1.3B) compared to state-of-the-art LLMs, further scaling up our experiments is an important future step.
(2) While our experiments on combining multiple types of procedural data are a proof of concept, they lay out several promising directions.
Reproducibility Statement
We provide technical details in the appendix to aid with the reproducibility.
See
Appendix B for
the procedural data generation,
Appendix D for
the algorithmic reasoning tasks,
Appendix C for
the architectures used,
and Appendix E for
the hyperparameters and training details.
A documented version of our code is also in preparation and will be released with
the final version of this paper.
