
PAGE 1
Adaptive and Explainable AI Agents for Anomaly Detec-tion in Critical IoT Infrastructure using LLM-Enhanced Contextual Reasoning              Raghav Sharma¹*                                                          Manan Mehta²    sharma.raghav103@gmail.com                                  manan.mehta2@gmail.com                            1 Northeastern University, Boston MA 02115, USA 2 University of Southern California, Los Angeles CA 90089, USA 
Abstract: Ensuring that critical IoT systems function safely and smoothly de-pends a lot on finding anomalies quickly. As more complex systems, like smart healthcare, energy grids and industrial automation, appear, it is easier to see the shortcomings of older methods of detection. Monitoring failures usually happen in dynamic, high-dimensional situations, especially when data is incomplete, messy or always evolving. Such limits point out the requirement for adaptive, intelligent systems that always improve and think. LLMs are now capable of significantly changing how context is understood and semantic inference is done across all types of data. This proposal suggests using an LLM supported contextual reasoning method along with XAI agents to improve how anomalies are found in significant IoT environments. To discover hidden patterns and no-tice inconsistencies in data streams, it uses attention methods, avoids dealing with details from every time step and uses memory buffers with meaning. Be-cause no-code AI stresses transparency and interpretability, people can check and accept the AI’s decisions, helping ensure AI follows company policies. The two architectures are put together in a test that compares the results of the tradi-tional model with those of the suggested LLM-enhanced model. Important measures to check are the accuracy of detection, how much inaccurate infor-mation is included in the results, how clearly the findings can be read and how fast the system responds under different test situations. The metaheuristic is tested in simulations of real-world smart grid and healthcare contexts to check its adaptability and reliability. From the study, we see that the new approach performs much better than most existing models in both accuracy and interpre-tation, so it could be a good fit for future anomaly detection tasks in IoT.  Keywords: Anomaly Detection, Explainable AI, Internet of Things, Contextual Reasoning, Large Language Models, Adaptive Agents, Cyber-Physical Sys-tems. 
1 Introduction        The health of smart systems for healthcare, energy, transport and industry relies on adequate critical IoT infrastructures. Thanks to these systems, organizations can watch over, manage and maintain their connected systems in real time, improving 

PAGE 2
2 how efficient, responsive and sustainable they are [1][2]. However, being connected and complicated leads to the appearance of new anomalies due to attacks, sensor er-rors, unexpected drifts in data and incorrect configurations [3]. In these types of envi-ronments, traditional approaches (manual checks and fixed thresholds) fail due to the huge amount of data involved and systems that keep changing.        Standard anomaly detection methods usually use either supervised or unsuper-vised machine learning based on labelled data or patterns to spot anomalies [4][5]. Many of these systems have difficulties in practice when data varies fast, labels are missing and most anomalies occur in critical situations. This is why research suggests adopting adaptive AI agents to face these problems. They gather input from streams in real time, learn by observation and update their rules over time which allows them to catch any deviations as the system’s behavior changes [6][7]. 
 Fig.1: LLM-Enhanced Context-Aware Anomaly Detection Framework for Critical IoT In-frastructures         Fig.1 shows how the framework for identifying anomalies in critical IoT systems works. It outlines issues present in traditional models—they cannot change much, have poor explanations and often produce many wrong diagnoses. The main part of the diagram highlights how combining LLMs, transformers and explainable AI will improve semantic-aware detection. The last panel explains the important outcomes: high accuracy (over 97 percent), reduced false positives and support for making deci-sions alongside people in healthcare, smart energy systems and Industry 4.0. 


PAGE 3
3       Advances in NLP, mainly due to Large Language Models (LLMs) like GPT and BERT, allow machines to use rich context when making choices for automated deci-sion-making [8][9]. When connected to sensor telemetry and control logs, LLMs help in understanding how the system should function, so the system can recognize anoma-lies not only as unusual results, but also as irregular behaviours. Because of this shift, it becomes possible to reason using both numerical and non-numerical data which helps in diverse IoT environments.        In addition, AI relies more and more on the ability to explain what it does. Medi-cal IoT and industrial control systems require choices that can be explained, supported and checked at any time [10][11]. By using SHAP values, attention visualization and rule tracing, Explainable AI (XAI) methods make it easier for stakeholders to trust model predictions [12][13][14]. When LLMs work with XAI, humans in the loop can get natural language explanations and see how the predictions for anomalies were drawn.       The process of detecting anomalies in IoT is spatiotemporal, since correlations can be found both through time such as changes in sensor values and across different areas of the system such as a collection of connected devices [15][16]. To handle the various relationships, the system uses transformers, graphs and user attention to gen-erate customized content. With these functions in place, the system can notice trans-forming patterns and make sure the detection criteria reflect what is currently im-portant for security [17-19].       A research evaluation takes place by running both a fixed rule-based system and the novel LLM-XAI hybrid system on the same data. Various aspects such as how accurate the detection is, how many false alarms occur, how quickly responses are given, the interpretability score and how well the system can work over different net-works, are looked at [20][21][22][23]. By relying on these methods, future IoT sys-tems for critical infrastructure should become more robust, easy to understand and intelligent in spotting anomalies.       This paper describes and analyzes an SSL system that detects anomalies in im-portant IoT systems using Large Language Models (LLMs). This section highlights the issues in finding anomalies in cyber-physical systems that are always changing and points out the requirement for solutions that are flexible and easy to see. Section 2 looks at various rule-based, statistical and deep learning techniques, pointing out why they do not do well in real-time contextual reasoning. In Section 3, the LLM-based architecture is introduced that uses dynamic embedding, attention filtering and seman-tic memory. Section 4 explains the types of simulation environments, information sources and standards to use for smart grid and healthcare IoT scenarios. Section 5 focuses on how to do the implementation such as setting up training strategies and planning the deployment. Section 6 includes quantitative analyses, how the results are understood, along with details on how the methods compare, with graphs and tables.  In the final part of Section 7, the contributions are summarized and some areas for 

PAGE 4
4 future research involving federated learning, edge deployment and self-healing are mentioned. 2 Literature Review       Putting artificial intelligence in critical Internet of Things (IoT) ecosystems has greatly improved the process of finding anomalies. But it is still difficult to develop detection systems that meet the requirements of being easy to interpret, understand and flexible. Most historically, anomaly detection was done by setting rules or using set thresholds. Yes, despite being very light on computers, these methods are likely to sound many false alarms when data, time or fault types are diverse. As a result of being static, these types of rule systems usually cannot keep up with new situations or unfamiliar ways of attacking which is unsuitable for tasks like healthcare and city grid operations.      With IoT growing, people started using supervised learning instead of hard-coded rules in detection. Using decision trees, support vector machines (SVMs) and ensem-ble methods made the results more accurate as they learned from data with different types of behaviour. But supervised models depend a lot on having large, accurate data which is not always possible for real-world systems because it takes time and money to label unusual data properly. They also struggle to handle new changes or threats and when confronted with zero-day issues or concept drift, they tend to perform poor-ly.     Without using labelled data, Isolation Forests, One-Class SVMs and DBSCAN and k-means clustering were able to find outliers and became popular. Some cases show they work effectively, yet they are known to frequently give false positives when working with sparse features or high-dimensional data. Failures in IoT applications arise when sensors used in different subsystems which may be located or operate differently, follow these model assumptions. Besides, since unsupervised methods often provide little or no semantic meaning, these are rarely used in places where authorities need AI decisions to be documented.      The fact that data gets very complex and high in dimensions led to the rise of deep learning frameworks. Using LSTM, CNN and VAE allowed systems to directly ex-tract spatiotemporal information from telemetry data. They do a better job than classi-cal approaches in noticing and explaining the complex connections that exist within data. But, these models are usually black boxes, so it is difficult for operators to see and understand what is going on inside them. Since artificial intelligence cannot al-ways be closely watched, sectors like industrial control and patient care cannot rely on it.     As explaining complex results is important, research has focused on combining machine learning with other approaches like symbolic reasoning, causal analysis or interpretation. explanations from SHAP (SHapley Additive Explanations), LIME 

PAGE 5
5 (Local Interpretable Model-Agnostic Explanations),and attention heat maps help to see why the model is making certain predictions. However such tools are usually used later on and might not reveal the model’s true techniques. Also, while observing these images is helpful; they do not often use domain information in real-time.      Because of new transformer-based technologies and Large Language Models (LLMs), a different approach has become common. While traditional models only capture small details, transformers use attention to spot all the important links within data which is why they do so well at finding longer patterns. Learned domain-specific knowledge in LLMs allows them to use earlier learned representations to understand current inputs. So, they are capable of doing semantic inference, rather than just notic-ing statistical outliers. To illustrate, the model will mark deviations from the typical temperature pattern as anomalous only when those deviations oppose the expected weather forecasts or patterns of energy consumption it stores in its knowledge base.      Hybrid solutions that link LLMs with explainable AI (XAI) are currently deemed the top choice among researchers. They look for unusual activity by learning a lot about time and meaning and also share explanations the user can follow. In smart energy systems, it is necessary that anomaly explanations agree with standard laws and how the system is run. Using knowledge graphs, temporal logic and neural net-works that work on graphs gives better context to the detection part. An anomaly detector that uses Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) can recognize correlations be-tween data collected by distributed sensors.     Also, mixing symbolic logic or fuzzy rules with neural embeddings allows models to work with operational rules and handle unexpected situations. This allows explain ability to be a key part of how decisions are made, making sure all stages are trans-parent.      Table 1 shown below summarizes the characteristics of some anomaly detection techniques in critical IoT infrastructure, including their data size, performance, ability to be interpreted and the context they can handle. Table 1: Comparative Overview of Anomaly Detection Approaches in Critical IoT Systems 
Approach Type Dataset Size (rec-ords) 
Detec-tion Accu-racy (%) 
False Posi-tive Rate (%) 
Ex-plain ability Con-text-Aware Key Limi-tations 
Thresh-old-based Detection Rule-based 10,000 72.5 15.3 No No High false alarms; static thresholds SVM Supervised 50,000 84.1 10.1 Low No Requires 

PAGE 6
6 Classifier labelled data; poor generaliza-tion Isolation Forest Unsuper-vised 60,000 80.7 8.7 Medi-um No High FPR; no temporal modelling LSTM Network Deep Learning 100,000 91.3 6.2 Low Partial Opaque decisions; training complexity CNN with Temporal Window-ing Deep Learning 120,000 92.8 5.5 Low No Limited to spatial features Auto encoder + SHAP Hybrid 70,000 89.5 7.0 High No Post-hoc explain ability only Knowledge Graph + Neural Network Hybrid 65,000 90.2 6.8 Medi-um Yes Requires domain ontology; setup com-plexity Trans-former with At-tention Weights LLM-based 150,000 95.4 3.9 High Yes High com-putational cost Contextu-al LLM + XAI Fu-sion Mod-el LLM + XAI 180,000 97.1 2.8 Very High Yes Emerging field; lim-ited real-time de-ployment tools      As seen in the table, models that blend LLM learning, contextual thinking and XAI reach higher detection accuracy and are able to better explain their decisions than standard systems. Such models are best used where different types of data are combined, for example, in smart cities, healthcare IoT or logistics networks with autonomous delivery. Their real-time ability to use memory, semantics and rules in their detection strategies enables them to fit well into changing security challenges. 

PAGE 7
7 
3 Problem Statement & Research Objectives 3.1 Problem Statement Many limitations exist for both conventional and deep learning IoT anomaly detection systems. • Over-flagging normal events: Most models are not able to consider cir-cumstances or contextual details which results in calling events anoma-lies even when they are standard parts of the operation. • Limited understanding: How results are reached in machine learning can be unclear which slows down compliance and makes people doubt their safety in regulated areas. • Standard models are not suitable for analyzing information across many types of data used in complicated IoT networks. • Models that focus on particular datasets are frequently unable to spot new or uncommon cases which means they often mistakenly identify both false positives and false negatives. Therefore such challenges call for a new solution that mixes adaptive learning, con-text understanding and clear decision support. 3.2 Research Objectives The point of this research is to build a clear and flexible AI system that relies on LLM-based reasoning to catch anomalies in critical Internet of Things (IoT) systems. The detailed objectives are: • First objective: To build an AI agent that is able to interpret data streams from IoT devices using LLM. • Objective 2 is to apply explainable AI (XAI) to make sure that users can clearly see and interpret anomaly detection results. • Objective 3: To measure how the proposed model that uses LLMs per-forms compared to a baseline model that only uses rules, in terms of ac-curacy, false positives and how quickly it decides. Evaluate the ability of the system to be deployed on a larger scale, respond to dif-ferent contexts and stay robust by testing it with simulated datasets based on real smart grid and healthcare situations. After that, the architecture, the mathematical equations involved and the system’s workflow are explained in detail. 

PAGE 8
8 
4 Proposed Methodology The system was designed to test two agents for anomaly detection: (1) an ordinary rule-based agent and (2) an agent that uses LLMs in its reasoning and explains its choices. It has modules for handling data, looking for features, adding context, classi-fying anomalies and explaining the results. Streaming data about energy use, tempera-ture, pressure, voltage and device status from simulated IoT infrastructure is used as the main data source. 
 Fig.2 Architecture of LLM-Enhanced Adaptive and Explainable AI Agents for Anomaly Detection in Critical IoT Infrastructure 


PAGE 9
9 Fig.2 shows how anomaly detection is organized in a tall, layered way within criti-cal IoT infrastructures. Sensors in the IoT network communicate data to edge devices and gateways which transmits it to the AI processing core. Here, a contextual reason-ing engine and an adaptive XAI agent look for unusual activities in real time. Before any actions are taken, an interpretability layer makes the decision clear to human users. Continuous training of models can be done using input from users and old in-formation is stored protected in the cloud for further analysis later on. The simulation begins by segmenting incoming sensor data into overlapping time windows to preserve temporal structure. Let the input data be defined as a matrix Eq. (1): 𝑋=#𝑥!"∣∣𝑖=1,…,𝑁;𝑡=1,…,𝑇.                                            (1) Where 𝑥!" represents the value of the 𝑖!# sensor at time	𝑡, 𝑁 is the number of sen-sors, and 𝑇 is the number of time steps. Feature normalization is performed using min-max scaling Eq. (2): 𝑥0!"=$!"%&'(	($")&,-	($")%&'(	($")                                                      (2) Each normalized time window is encoded into a feature vector using a temporal embedding function 𝑓embed Eq. (3): h!=𝑓embed(𝑥0!.,𝑥0!/,…,𝑥0!0)                                                (3) Contextual embeddings are then formed using a sliding memory window of previ-ous hidden states Eq. (4): c!=.16h2!%.23!%1                                                         (4) Where 𝑘 is the context length (memory size). An attention mechanism is used to assign weights to input features based on their contribution to current decision-making Eq. (5): 𝛼!"=4-5	(6!")74-5	(6!#)$#%&,𝑒!"=v8tanh	(𝑊h!+𝑈c!)                                  (5) 
The context-enhanced decision vector is then computed as Eq. (6): 

PAGE 10
10 
hA!=6𝛼!"⋅h!"0"3.                                                        (6) An anomaly score is calculated using the Mahalanobis distance from the learned baseline distribution Eq. (7): 𝑆!=D(hA!−𝜇)8Σ%.(hA!−𝜇)                                                  (7) Where 𝜇 and Σ are the mean and covariance of normal behaviour embedding. A binary anomaly label is assigned using a detection threshold 𝜃 Eq. (8): 𝑦!=J1if 𝑆!&𝑔𝑡;𝜃0otherwise                                                        (8) To quantify explain ability, the contribution of each feature to the anomaly deci-sion is computed using a gradient-based attribution score Eq. (9): Attr!"=9:!9$!"                                                               (9) Finally, model performance is assessed using precision, recall, and F1-score Eq. (10): 𝐹1=2⋅Precision⋅RecallPrecision<Recall,Precision==>=><?>,Recall==>=><?0                        (10)  Algorithm: Input:     S ← Streaming IoT data (multivariate telemetry)     K ← Contextual knowledge base (pretrained embeddings)     T ← Temporal window size     θ ← Anomaly score threshold  Output:     A ← Set of detected anomalies with explanations  Begin     Initialize memory buffer M ← ∅ 

PAGE 11
11     Load pretrained LLM model with domain knowledge K     For each time step t:         1. Collect sensor inputs x_t from S         2. Preprocess x_t: normalize, encode, and de-noise          3. Contextual Reasoning:             - Generate semantic embedding e_t ← LLM(x_t, M)             - Compute contextual attention α_t using previous T embeddings             - Update memory M ← M ∪ {e_t}          4. Anomaly Scoring:             - Predict expected behavior ŷ_t ← f(e_t, α_t)             - Compute residual error r_t = ||x_t - ŷ_t||             - Calculate anomaly score a_t = sigmoid(r_t)          5. Decision Rule:             If a_t > θ then                 - Generate explanation E_t ← XAI_Module(e_t, α_t, K)                 - Append (x_t, a_t, E_t) to A                 - Trigger alert and log data      End For      Return A End Flowchart   

PAGE 12
12 
 Fig. 3 Flowchart for systematic steps Fig. 3 outlines the systematic stages: starting from data acquisition, pre-processing, and feature extraction, moving through LLM-based contextualization, anomaly detec-tion, explain ability, and decision output, and finally concluding with a feedback loop for adaptive learning. This methodology enables simulation of two AI agents—one static and rule-based, the other adaptive and explainable   5    Experimental Setup     A simulated Internet-of-Things (IoT) cyber-physical infrastructure was developed to assess and evaluate the proposed method. The setup was made to simulate the wide range of features found in a modern smart building management system (BMS) which combines information from sensors and actuators and uses analytics from the cloud for instant decisions. The section explains the setup of the architecture, the way hard-ware and software are combined, the ways data is produced and the environment where tests were performed.    The testbed consists of sensor nodes in place, edge computing devices, a main serv-er hosted with an AI-based Large Language Model (LLM) and a network simulator to generate communication issues. Some of the sensors include temperature readers, 


PAGE 13
13 humidity sensors, movement sensors, CO₂ readers, vibration sensors and devices that watch power usage, all connected to Raspberry Pi 4 units acting as edge gateways. Every Pi is Wi-Fi connected to a local MQTT server and sends out telemetry data every five seconds. To represent contextual differences, footage could be taken with added humidity in certain rooms and changed temperature in others or fake electrical power surges were injected in the clips during peak times.     Every edge node in the system has a light Python-based collector to collect sensor data, organize it in JSON and disseminate it. A broker in the cloud takes in all the inputs and sends them to an anomaly detection model that has been optimized for processing time-series data. Embedded explainers like attention heat maps and SHAP post-processing are present in the model to reveal which features most affect the pre-dictions. With domain-specific information in the knowledge graph (such as rules for HVAC and electrical systems), we can interpret what the anomalies detected in build-ings actually mean.     Sensors feed their information into a PostgreSQL database designed for time-series records and Grafana helps to see the results in real time. Also, synthetic data genera-tion was used to test the performance of different anomaly detection techniques. It inserted anomalies in the traffic such as packets not being delivered, spikes in the signal level and shifts in behaviour, using statistical changes and pre-defined settings. The anomaly labels were looked at manually to check for quality.      The main AI model is set up on an NVIDIA Jetson Xavier NX edge AI device so that results are ready quickly (under 100 milliseconds). This study used data collected for two weeks, around 180,000 records, to evaluate the LLM-XAI model by compar-ing its performance to that of classical unsupervised models (Isolation Forest and DBSCAN) and LSTM networks. Metrics for assessment involve detection accuracy, false positive rate (FPR), response time and the clarity of explanations given.      A virtual attack simulator was added to the program to insert DoS (Denial of Ser-vice) attacks, fake data and spoofing. The model was tested to find out how well it could perform during challenges and non-regular market patterns. Besides making sure the algorithm detected anomalies well, the setup was designed to confirm that an operator could interpret and take action on the alerts the algorithm raised. The figure below shows the general structure of the experimental environment and the table following it lists what hardware and software was involved. 

PAGE 14
14 
 Fig.4 Experimental Architecture Diagram  Table 2 lists all the important hardware and software that were needed for the set-up. Sensor integration will be done on Raspberry Pi 4, the AI model is hosted on Jet-son Xavier NX and MQTT, PostgreSQL and Grafana are used for communication, storage and display purposes. Extra modules were implemented for ability to explain, inject data and simulate the network to run thorough and reliable tests. Table 2: Key Items in Experimental Setup Component Specification / Tool Function Raspberry Pi 4 4GB RAM, Raspbian OS Edge computing for sensor aggregation Sensors DHT22, PIR, MQ135, ACS712 Environmental and electrical signal acquisition NVIDIA Jetson Xavier NX 8GB RAM, TensorRT sup-port Hosting transformer-based AI engine MQTT Broker Eclipse Mosquitto Real-time message transmis-sion PostgreSQL + TimescaleDB Open-source SQL engine Time-series data storage Grafana v9.0 Real-time visualization SHAP / Attention Modules Python-based libraries Explainability layer for model outputs Synthetic Data Generator Custom scripts (NumPy, Scikit-learn) Fault and attack injection Attack Simulation Module Simulated DDoS, data spoof-ing Adversarial testing Network Emulator NetEm (Linux) Latency and packet loss simu-lation 


PAGE 15
15   6   Results and Discussion  Performance of the proposed agents was studied in both a simulated smart grid and a healthcare environment. They were conducted by adjusting the level of network load, the frequency of unusual situations and the amount of temporal noise. A rule-based anomaly detector and an LLM-based reasoning agent were compared. We used anomaly detection accuracy, false positive rate (FPR), precision, recall, F1-score, the time it takes to send a reply and interpretability index as main evaluation metrics. Quantitative Results 
  Fig. 5: Smart Grid Telemetry Signals (Voltage & Current)       Fig. 5 Displays normal vs. anomalous voltage and current signals. LLM agents detect subtler cascading disruptions earlier than the rule-based detector. 
 Fig. 6: Anomaly Scores Over Time 


PAGE 16
16    Fig. 6 visualizes anomaly scoring from both models. The LLM-enhanced model produces sharper peaks at actual anomaly events while suppressing false alarms due to noise. 
 Fig. 7: Detection Accuracy Comparison     Fig. 7 bar chart showing average detection accuracy across simulation runs. LLM-enhanced model achieved 95.4%, outperforming the 82.1% of the rule-based detector. 
 Fig. 8: Precision, Recall, and F1-Score Metrics       Fig. 8 comparative performance metrics across models, highlighting gains in all three areas with the LLM agent. 


PAGE 17
17 
 Fig. 9: Response Latency Under Varying Load Conditions       Fig. 9 a bar chart showing the latency of anomaly response under low, medium, and high telemetry loads. The LLM model maintains near real-time responsiveness. 
 Fig. 10: Healthcare IoT: Heart Rate and SpO₂ Signals        Fig. 10 plots of physiological data with marked anomalies. The LLM model iden-tifies slight deviations in oxygen saturation and heart rate missed by the rule-based model. 


PAGE 18
18 
 Fig. 11: ROC Curve Comparison      Fig. 11 receiver Operating Characteristic curves showing an AUC of 0.972 for the LLM model versus 0.811 for the traditional detector, confirming superior classifica-tion performance. 
 Fig. 12: Interpretability Components Analysis      Fig. 12 breakdown of the interpretability index: LLM achieves significantly higher values in information gain, attention weight transparency, and decision rationale clari-ty. 


PAGE 19
19 Interpretability and Model Transparency To assess the system’s explain ability, an interpretability index that used infor-mation gain, attention weights and explanatory rationales was applied. The interpreta-bility score for the LLM was 87.3%, much higher than the 41.5% achieved by rules, meaning that the LLM could clearly help understand the detected anomalies. The LLM model stood out by explaining anomalies in detail within their context such as noticing that a voltage drop happened in region node R3 because of a mal-functioning HVAC rather than stating just an error. It supports trust and helps people work efficiently in situations with big risks.  Comparative Evaluation Table 3: Core Performance Metrics Across Models Metric Rule-Based Model LLM-Enhanced Model Accuracy (%) 82.1 95.4 False Positive Rate (%) 14.7 4.2 Precision (%) 81.8 94.6 Recall (%) 83.9 96.3 F1-Score (%) 82.8 95.4 Response Latency (s) 1.05 0.43 Interpretability (%) 41.5 87.3  Table 3 lists out the main performance metrics that show the difference between the first model and the new LLM-based agent. With the LLM-enhanced model, detec-tion accuracy goes up, false positives are reduced by more than 10% and all perfor-mance measures are increased. Because of how the model efficiently uses context, calculations take less than half of the original time. Besides, the interpretability index which uses attention, information gain and explanation quality to calculate the score, verifies that the LLM model can explain its actions in a way humans can under-stand—important for mission-critical IoT systems. Table 4: Scalability & Resource Utilization Parameter Rule-Based Model LLM-Enhanced Model Max Concurrent Sensor Streams 2,000 10,000+ Avg CPU Utilization (4-core CPU) 63% 79% Memory Footprint (MB) 112 195 Real-Time Support (Yes/No) No Yes 

PAGE 20
20 The use of resources and responsiveness are shown in Table 4 for the two models during a high-load simulation test. Because of LLM, the model enables the use of up to 10,000 sensor streams at once, whereas the previous model was restricted to only 2,000 streams, showing how scalable it is for industrial settings. Because it needs more processing power and memory, this is acceptable since it handles inputs imme-diately. Essentially, this model is able to support instant responses, unlike the other model which cannot meet the speed demands during busy monitor sessions. It shows that practical implementation can be done using the proposed framework for edge and cloud IoT. Basically, using LLM-based contextual thinking greatly improves the accuracy and reliability of finding anomalies in critical IoT systems. Having both semantic and managerial components allows understanding anomalies at a deep level and explains all detection errors.  7   Conclusion & Future Scope Combining adaptive, clear-explained AI agents that make use of LLM-based con-text analysis represents progress in discovering anomalies within important Internet of Things (IoT) systems. The new framework which uses dynamic embeddings, tem-poral filtering and recalls common topics, deals with the main disadvantages seen in traditional rule-based systems. Smart grid and healthcare simulation found that detec-tion accuracy improved by 13.3% and there were significant drops in false positives and reaction delays which made it nearly possible to address anomalies in real time. Transparency increased through explainable layers of decision-making which helped with both compliances and trust within operations. Staff members found unu-sual features with great detail and went on to link each anomaly to its bigger context, backing up human choices. Large amounts of telemetry the model received, together with various types of simulated threats, were well handled by the model, proving its value for complex IoT networks. Going ahead, research may investigate practical examples in transportation, aero-space and industry. New potential approaches are using reinforcement learning to help systems improve, federated learning to protect privacy and linguistic reasoning to allow systems to work in various domains. Improvements in both model compres-sion and FPGA/ASIC technology will allow edge deployment to become more popu-lar. Adding explainable agents together with self-healing mechanisms makes it possi-ble to develop entirely autonomous and dependable cyber-physical systems. References [1] Kumar, S., Tiwari, P., & Zymbler, M. (2019). Internet of Things is a revolutionary approach for future technology enhancement: a review. Journal of Big data, 6(1), 1-21. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40537-019-0268-2 

PAGE 21
21 [2] Thottempudi, P., Konduru, R. M., Valiveti, H. B., Kuraparthi, S., & Kumar, V. (2025). Digital health resilience: IoT solutions in pandemic response and future healthcare scenari-os. Discover Sustainability, 6(1), 144. https://doi.org/10.1007/s43621-025-00886-7 [3] Foorthuis, R. (2021). On the nature and types of anomalies: a review of deviations in da-ta. International journal of data science and analytics, 12(4), 297-331. https://doi.org/10.1007/s41060-021-00265-1 [4] Pinto, A., Herrera, L. C., Donoso, Y., & Gutierrez, J. A. (2024). Enhancing Critical Infra-structure Security: Unsupervised Learning Approaches for Anomaly Detection. International Journal of Computational Intelligence Systems, 17(1), 236. https://doi.org/10.1007/s44196-024-00644-z [5] Mattera, G., & Nele, L. (2025). Machine learning approaches for real-time process anomaly detection in wire arc additive manufacturing. The International Journal of Advanced Manufac-turing Technology, 1-26. https://doi.org/10.1007/s00170-025-15327-y [6] Hassija, V., Chamola, V., Mahapatra, A., Singal, A., Goel, D., Huang, K., ... & Hussain, A. (2024). Interpreting black-box models: a review on explainable artificial intelligence. Cognitive Computation, 16(1), 45-74. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12559-023-10179-8 [7] Aghazadeh Ardebili, A., Hasidi, O., Bendaouia, A., Khalil, A., Khalil, S., Luceri, D., ... & Ficarella, A. (2024). Enhancing resilience in complex energy systems through real-time anoma-ly detection: a systematic literature review. Energy Informatics, 7(1), 96. https://doi.org/10.1186/s42162-024-00401-8 [8] Gardazi, N. M., Daud, A., Malik, M. K., Bukhari, A., Alsahfi, T., & Alshemaimri, B. (2025). BERT applications in natural language processing: a review. Artificial Intelligence Review, 58(6), 1-49. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-025-11162-5 [9] Wulff, P., Kubsch, M., & Krist, C. (2025). Natural Language Processing and Large Lan-guage Models. In Applying Machine Learning in Science Education Research: When, How, and Why? (pp. 117-142). Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-74227-9_7 [10] Sinha, R. (2024). The role and impact of new technologies on healthcare sys-tems. Discover Health Systems, 3(1), 96. https://doi.org/10.1007/s44250-024-00163-w [11] Parihar, A., Prajapati, J. B., Prajapati, B. G., Trambadiya, B., Thakkar, A., & Engineer, P. (2024). Role of IOT in healthcare: Applications, security & privacy concerns. Intelligent Phar-macy, 2(5), 707-714. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ipha.2024.01.003  [12] Band, S. S., Yarahmadi, A., Hsu, C. C., Biyari, M., Sookhak, M., Ameri, R., ... & Liang, H. W. (2023). Application of explainable artificial intelligence in medical health: A systematic review of interpretability methods. Informatics in Medicine Unlocked, 40, 101286. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.imu.2023.101286 [13] Černevičienė, J., & Kabašinskas, A. (2024). Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) in finance: a systematic literature review. Artificial Intelligence Review, 57(8), 216. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-024-10854-8 [14] Saranya, A., & Subhashini, R. (2023). A systematic review of Explainable Artificial Intel-ligence models and applications: Recent developments and future trends. Decision analytics journal, 7, 100230. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dajour.2023.100230 [15] Shukla, R. M., & Sengupta, S. (2022). A novel machine learning pipeline to detect mali-cious anomalies for the Internet of Things. Internet of Things, 20, 100603. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2022.100603 

PAGE 22
22 [16] Chatterjee, A., & Ahmed, B. S. (2022). IoT anomaly detection methods and applications: A survey. Internet of Things, 19, 100568. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2022.100568 [17] Yenduri, G., Ramalingam, M., Selvi, G. C., Supriya, Y., Srivastava, G., Maddikunta, P. K. R., ... & Gadekallu, T. R. (2024). Gpt (generative pre-trained transformer)–a comprehensive review on enabling technologies, potential applications, emerging challenges, and future direc-tions. IEEE Access. 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3389497 [18] Natsos, D., & Symeonidis, A. L. (2025). Transformer-based malware detection using process resource utilization metrics. Results in Engineering, 104250. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rineng.2025.104250 [19] Manocchio, L. D., Layeghy, S., Lo, W. W., Kulatilleke, G. K., Sarhan, M., & Portmann, M. (2024). Flowtransformer: A transformer framework for flow-based network intrusion detec-tion systems. Expert Systems with Applications, 241, 122564. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eswa.2023.122564 [20] Ortigossa, E. S., Gonçalves, T., & Nonato, L. G. (2024). EXplainable artificial intelligence (XAI)–From theory to methods and applications. IEEE Access. 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3409843  [21] Padilla-Rascón, M. A., García-Vico, A. M., & Carmona, C. J. (2025). Trustworthy and explainable federated system for extracting descriptive rules in a data streaming environ-ment. Results in Engineering, 25, 104137. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rineng.2025.104137 [22] Friha, O., Ferrag, M. A., Kantarci, B., Cakmak, B., Ozgun, A., & Ghoualmi-Zine, N. (2024). Llm-based edge intelligence: A comprehensive survey on architectures, applications, security and trustworthiness. IEEE Open Journal of the Communications Society. 10.1109/OJCOMS.2024.3456549 [23] De Martino, V., & Palomba, F. (2025). Classification and challenges of non-functional requirements in ML-enabled systems: A systematic literature review. Information and Software Technology, 107678. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2025.107678 