https://arxiv.org/api/Ws/kWygutlm4VWrVd2mti7tVwXM
arXiv Query: search_query=submittedDate:"202602280000 TO 202603020000" AND ( (cat:cs.CL OR cat:cs.LG) AND (all:"language model" OR all:transformer OR all:"mixture of experts" OR all:"foundation model") )&id_list=&start=100&max_results=100
2026-10-08T13:23:10Z
100
104
100
http://arxiv.org/abs/2603.01293v1
Theoretical Perspectives on Data Quality and Synergistic Effects in Pre- and Post-Training Reasoning Models
2026-03-01T21:58:09Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) are pretrained on massive datasets and later instruction-tuned via supervised fine-tuning (SFT) or reinforcement learning (RL). Best practices emphasize large, diverse pretraining data, whereas post-training operates differently: SFT relies on smaller, high-quality datasets, while RL benefits more from scale, with larger amounts of feedback often outweighing label quality. Yet it remains unclear why pretraining and RL require large datasets, why SFT excels on smaller ones, and what defines high-quality SFT data. In this work, we theoretically analyze transformers trained on an in-context weight prediction task for linear regression. Our analysis reveals several key findings: $(i)$ balanced pretraining data can induce latent capabilities later activated during post-training, and $(ii)$ SFT learns best from a small set of examples challenging for the pretrained model, while excessively large SFT datasets may dilute informative pretraining signals. In contrast, RL is most effective on large-scale data that is not overly difficult for the pretrained model. We validate these theoretical insights with experiments on large nonlinear transformer architectures.
2026-03-01T21:58:09Z
35 pages, 5 figures
Adel Javanmard
Baharan Mirzasoleiman
Vahab Mirrokni
http://arxiv.org/abs/2603.19280v1
From Feature-Based Models to Generative AI: Validity Evidence for Constructed Response Scoring
2026-03-01T23:21:18Z
The rapid advancements in large language models and generative artificial intelligence (AI) capabilities are making their broad application in the high-stakes testing context more likely. Use of generative AI in the scoring of constructed responses is particularly appealing because it reduces the effort required for handcrafting features in traditional AI scoring and might even outperform those methods. The purpose of this paper is to highlight the differences in the feature-based and generative AI applications in constructed response scoring systems and propose a set of best practices for the collection of validity evidence to support the use and interpretation of constructed response scores from scoring systems using generative AI. We compare the validity evidence needed in scoring systems using human ratings, feature-based natural language processing AI scoring engines, and generative AI. The evidence needed in the generative AI context is more extensive than in the feature-based scoring context because of the lack of transparency and other concerns unique to generative AI such as consistency. Constructed response score data from a large corpus of independent argumentative essays written by 6-12th grade students demonstrate the collection of validity evidence for different types of scoring systems and highlight the numerous complexities and considerations when making a validity argument for these scores.
2026-03-01T23:21:18Z
37 pages, 8 tables, 6 figures
Jodi M. Casabianca
Daniel F. McCaffrey
Matthew S. Johnson
Naim Alper
Vladimir Zubenko
http://arxiv.org/abs/2603.01326v1
Truth as a Trajectory: What Internal Representations Reveal About Large Language Model Reasoning
2026-03-01T23:52:10Z
Existing explainability methods for Large Language Models (LLMs) typically treat hidden states as static points in activation space, assuming that correct and incorrect inferences can be separated using representations from an individual layer. However, these activations are saturated with polysemantic features, leading to linear probes learning surface-level lexical patterns rather than underlying reasoning structures. We introduce Truth as a Trajectory (TaT), which models the transformer inference as an unfolded trajectory of iterative refinements, shifting analysis from static activations to layer-wise geometric displacement. By analyzing displacement of representations across layers, TaT uncovers geometric invariants that distinguish valid reasoning from spurious behavior. We evaluate TaT across dense and Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) architectures on benchmarks spanning commonsense reasoning, question answering, and toxicity detection. Without access to the activations themselves and using only changes in activations across layers, we show that TaT effectively mitigates reliance on static lexical confounds, outperforming conventional probing, and establishes trajectory analysis as a complementary perspective on LLM explainability.
2026-03-01T23:52:10Z
Hamed Damirchi
Ignacio Meza De la Jara
Ehsan Abbasnejad
Afshar Shamsi
Zhen Zhang
Javen Shi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2603.01327v3
SWE-Adept: An LLM-Based Agentic Framework for Deep Codebase Analysis and Structured Issue Resolution
2026-09-27T00:57:40Z
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit strong performance on self-contained programming tasks. However, they still struggle with repository-level software engineering (SWE), which demands (1) deep codebase navigation with effective context management for accurate localization, and (2) systematic approaches for iterative, test-driven code modification to resolve issues. To address these challenges, we propose SWE-Adept, an LLM-based two-agent framework where a localization agent identifies issue-relevant code locations and a resolution agent implements the corresponding fixes. For issue localization, we introduce agent-directed depth-first search that selectively traverses code dependencies. This minimizes issue-irrelevant content in the agent's context window and improves localization accuracy. For issue resolution, we employ adaptive planning and structured problem solving. We equip the agent with specialized tools for progress tracking and Git-based version control. These tools interface with a shared working memory that stores code-state checkpoints indexed by execution steps, facilitating precise checkpoint retrieval. This design enables reliable agent-driven version-control operations for systematic issue resolution, including branching to explore alternative solutions and reverting failed edits. Experiments on SWE-Bench Lite and SWE-Bench Pro demonstrate that SWE-Adept consistently outperforms prior approaches in both issue localization and resolution, improving the end-to-end resolve rate by up to 4.3%.
2026-03-01T23:52:30Z
AACL-IJCNLP 2026 Main Conference
Kang He
Kaushik Roy