A microwave super-resolution imaging approach towards breast cancer margin mapping (https://arxiv.org/html/2604.21636v1)
citeturn12844view0 [wordlim: 200] Crawled: last month; Content type: text/html; Source: open({"ref_id":"https://arxiv.org/html/2604.21636v1","lineno":null}); Total lines: 288
L0: ##### Report GitHub Issue
L1: 
L2: ×
L3: 
L4: Title:
L5: 
L6: Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
L7: 
L8: Description:
L9: 
L10: Submit without GitHub Submit in GitHub
L11: 
L12:  cite156†Image arXiv is now an independent nonprofit! cite0†Learn more†info.arxiv.org ×
L13: 
L14: cite1† Back to arXiv  L15: 
L16: cite2†Why HTML?†info.arxiv.org Report Issue  cite3† Back to Abstract  cite4† Download PDF L17:   1. cite5†Abstract L18:   2. cite6†I Introduction L19:   3. cite7†II Results and discussion L20:     1. cite8†II.1 System design and simulations L21:     2. cite9†II.2 Margin depth determination L22:     3. cite10†II.3 Performance and limitations L23:     4. cite11†II.4 Robustness to inter-patient variability L24:     5. cite12†II.5 Conclusions L25:   4. cite13†III Method L26:     1. cite14†III.1 Breast cancer tissue phantoms L27:     2. cite15†III.2 Transfer matrix modelling L28:     3. cite16†III.3 Engineered silicon photomodulator L29:     4. cite17†III.4 Single pixel imaging L30:     5. cite18†III.5 Margin depth determination algorithm L31:   5. cite19†A Tissue phantom fabrication L32:   6. cite20†B Tissue phantom optical parameters L33:   7. cite21†C Margin depth solver L34:   8. cite22†D Photomodulator characterisation L35:   9. cite23†E Image normalisation L36:   10. cite24†References L37:  cite25† License: CC BY 4.0 †info.arxiv.org L38: 
L39:  arXiv:2604.21636v1 [physics.optics] 23 Apr 2026
L40: # A microwave super-resolution imaging approach
L41: towards breast cancer margin mapping
L42: Harry Penketh  cite26†h.penketh2@exeter.ac.uk Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.  Sonal Saxena  Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.  Michal Mrnka  Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.  Cameron P. Gallagher  Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.
L43:  Caitlin Lloyd  Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.  Diksha Garg  Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.
L44:  Christopher R. Lawrence  QinetiQ, Cody Technology Park, Ively Road, Farnborough, GU14 0LX, UK  Nicholas E. Grant  School of Engineering, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK  John D. Murphy  School of Engineering, University of Warwick, Coventry, CV4 7AL, UK  School of Engineering, University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham, B15 2TT, UK  David B. Phillips  Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.
L45:  Ian R. Hooper  Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.  Nick Stone  Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.  Euan Hendry  Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX4 4QL, UK.
L46: ###### Abstract
L47: Accurate characterisation of margins in excised breast cancer tumours is critical to the success of surgical interventions, yet margin status is typically confirmed post‑operatively using histopathology. Here we present a new approach to intraoperative margin assessment based on microwave single pixel imaging, demonstrating tissue phantom hydration mapping across large areas (10 cm cm) at 1 mm resolution.
L48: By leveraging the photo-induced change in microwave transparency of a silicon modulator placed under the sample, we map the microwave reflectivity and identify positive margins with deeply sub-wavelength resolution. We test the discriminatory capabilities of our approach using gelatine-based tumour phantoms with variations in water density representative of the margin and cancerous tissues of a resected tumour.
L49: We demonstrate the capability to identify, locate and quantify inadequate margins up to the typically targeted minimum thickness of 2 mm. Furthermore, using numerical modelling, we show that our approach is expected to be resilient to patient-specific tissue differences. Our technique has potential for future deployment as a real-time intraoperative tissue margin analysis tool.
L50: ##  I Introduction
L51: Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in women worldwide, with around 2.3 million new cases and 670,000 related deaths each year [cite27†6 ]. Breast cancer is mostly treated using breast conserving surgery (BCS). The objectives of BCS are twofold; the complete removal of the tumour including a margin of healthy tissue, whilst minimising the volume of healthy tissue removed.
L52: The presence of a cancer-free margin surrounding an excised tumour has been shown to reduce the chance of local disease recurrence significantly [cite28†20 ]. Whilst margin guidelines vary internationally and with disease stage, the UK guidelines for breast cancer generally classify margins as positive (0 mm), close (2 mm) and negative (2 mm), as depicted in Fig. 1 inset. Histopathology remains the `gold standard' for margin assessment in an excised tumour, but is typically carried out days after BCS.
L53: A study revealed that in some UK units up to of patients undergoing BCS required reoperation to remove additional breast tissue, placing a significant burden on patients and healthcare providers [cite29†45 ].
L54: Intraoperative margin assessment (IMA) aims to identify inadequate margins during the initial surgery, thereby avoiding additional operations. However, there remains no clear leading approach which offers both high diagnostic accuracy and clinical feasibility [cite30†40 , cite31†19 ].
L55: Typically, techniques that yield high resolution images such as optical coherence tomography [cite32†15 , cite33†2 , cite34†3 , cite35†9 ], microscopy [cite36†5 , cite37†7 , cite38†8 , cite39†46 , cite40†47 , cite41†51 ] or Raman spectroscopy [cite42†48 , cite43†43 , cite44†17 ] suffer from limited penetration depth through margins and/or long acquisition times, whilst approaches with excellent depth penetration such as X-ray computed tomography [cite45†44 , cite46†29 , cite47†37 ] and magnetic resonance imaging [cite48†13 , cite49†32 ] have limited contrast and therefore low specificity.
L56: cite157†Image: Refer to caption Figure 1: Method for margin depth mapping. (a) Experimental setup: a vector network analyser (VNA) records the photoinduced change in microwave reflection spectrum from a tumour phantom atop a silicon modulator. By projecting a sequence of binary Hadamard patterns (of pixels - shown in right hand inset) and correlating each with a recorded spectrum, a hyperspectral image is formed.
L57: (Inset top left) lateral margins are classified as negative ( 2 mm healthy tissue), close ( 2 mm healthy tissue) and positive (no healthy tissue) as shown. Modelled changes in the normalised complex reflection when photoexcited for different margin depths are shown in (b) and (c) (phase and amplitude respectively). The UK target margin thickness of 2 mm is indicated by a dotted white line.
L58: Radiofrequency (RF) and terahertz electromagnetic radiation can discriminate cancerous from healthy tissues due to their differing hydration levels [cite50†10 , cite51†28 , cite52†22 , cite53†21 ]. However, high absorption by water impairs the use of terahertz radiation for evaluating deep breast cancer margins of millimetric thickness [cite54†50 , cite55†39 ].
L59: RF margin assessment probes, which operate at longer wavelengths, are commercially available, have been clinically tested, and have proven successful in reducing secondary surgery rates [cite56†38 , cite57†11 ]. However, these RF probes have major limitations due to their wide sensing fields ( 7 mm 7 mm [cite57†11 ]), within which they are unable to localise small regions of positive margin and are limited to a binary discrimination between positive and negative margins.
L60: In addition, they require laborious manual point measurements with limited sampling of the complete surface of the excised tumour.
L61: An RF imaging approach to margin assessment could transcend these constraints. However, the long wavelengths of RF radiation severely restrict resolution in standard imaging. In this work, we overcome the spatial resolution problem of RF approaches to margin analysis using a single-pixel camera that exploits near-field photo-generated masks to enable deeply sub-wavelength resolution.
L62: Our single-pixel camera operates in the microwave portion of the RF band, specifically the frequency range 11 - 20 GHz which exhibits the maximal sensitivity to tissue depth. We experimentally demonstrate quantification of positive and close margins using tissue phantoms, up to the 2 mm limit appropriate for breast cancer margins [cite58†4 , cite59†36 ].
L63: In this proof of concept demonstration, a 100 mm  100 mm area of excised tumour phantom is imaged hyperspectrally, and margin depth is algorithmically determined with 1 mm lateral resolution. Our approach offers a safe, low cost, sensitive method for intraoperative margin analysis, with significant potential to reduce the reoperation rate for breast cancer patients.
L64: ##  II Results and discussion
L65: ###  II.1 System design and simulations
L66: Our microwave single-pixel imaging system is shown schematically in Fig. 1(a). It relies on the interaction of a series of optical projections with a microwave beam probing the sample under test. This interaction is facilitated by a silicon photomodulator, which converts incident visible photons into free charge carriers within the silicon, thereby locally blocking the microwave beam.
L67: In single-pixel imaging, discussed in detail in Method section cite17†III.4 , an image is formed by correlating the sequence of measured signals (here the complex reflected electric field) with the known sequence of spatial masks, usually forming a Hadamard basis set [cite60†31 , cite61†12 ].
L68: In our approach, as the microwave image resolution is governed by the dimensions of the pixels in the photoexcited masks, deeply subwavelength resolution is possible, with resolution of s of microns demonstrated previously in this frequency band [cite62†34 ].
L69: The microwave probe beam is provided by a portable two port vector network analyser (VNA) coupled to two lens horn antennas in a reflection geometry, as shown in Fig. 1(a). This gives collimated illumination of the photomodulator at 35∘ with transverse-electric (TE) polarisation, allowing convenient normal incidence photomodulation from a digital micromirror device (DMD).
L70: The compact VNA serves as both source and detector and monitors the frequency-dependent complex reflection coefficient , capturing the change in both the amplitude and phase of reflected microwave radiation, over the range 11-20 GHz. Since the photomodulation induces a local change in reflection coefficient, our reconstructed images map the change in the complex reflection coefficient as a function of lateral position and frequency ().
L71: The value of depends on the illuminating microwave field and photoexcitation intensities, the photomodulator properties and crucially the presence of any material atop the modulator. To minimise susceptibility of the imaging to spatial inhomogeneity in the microwave and optical beams, experimental images and simulated data are normalised to the same signal in the absence of the sample( = , shown in supplementary Fig. S7).
L72: We use the transfer matrix method to model the expected normalised signal for a given margin depth and microwave frequency. In the transfer matrix method, described in detail in method section cite15†III.2 , the permittivities of the healthy and cancerous layers are assigned according to experimental characterisation of the tissue mimicking phantoms used for this work, also discussed in method section cite14†III.1 .
L73: The phantoms are composed of gelatine, water, safflower oil and kerosene in varying ratios following [cite63†25 ], such that they can mimic both the fatty (adipose) margin tissue and the high water content glandular cancerous tissue (supplementary Fig. S1) [cite64†26 ], with 20 water and 80 water, respectively. We vary the thickness of the margin layer, while the cancerous layer is 10 mm - this is thick enough so that transmission is zero.
L74: The permittivities and therefore losses in our fabricated margin phantoms are higher than some reported literature values for breast tissues (see supplementary Fig. S1(c) and (f)), with a 20 water content margin layer lying at the upper end of literature values for healthy breast tissue [cite65†27 , cite66†23 ]. This was selected as the most challenging scenario expected to occur in real tumours, with enhanced imaging sensitivity and depth predicted for real patients (as shown in supplementary Fig. S1).
L75: The phase and amplitude of predicted by the transfer matrix method for different margin thicknesses is shown in Figs. 1(b) and (c). We choose this frequency range as it corresponds to a quarter wavelength Fabry-Pérot condition within close margins, which gives strongly varying reflection as a function of both frequency and margin depth.
L76: This makes our measurement the most sensitive to small changes in tissue thickness for margin depths in the range 0 to 2 mm - exactly what one would want for breast cancer margin analysis. Higher order modes are also apparent for greater margin depth and/or higher frequency, which exhibit reduced contrast due to propagation losses through the margin tissue. This degeneracy necessitates a complex (amplitude and phase) or spectral measurement for depth disambiguation.
L77: By measuring a complex spectrum, we reduce susceptibility to experimental artefacts and noise.
L78: ###  II.2 Margin depth determination
L79: To provide a known spatially varying margin depth, we produce a bi-layer gelatine phantom which comprises two counter-inclined linear ramps of margin thickness, shown in Fig. 2(a). The 20 water layer is cast into a 3D printed acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) plastic mould with thickness ranging from 0 mm to 3 mm. The water overlayer is positioned on top of each ramp.
L80: In addition, we include a localised cancerous protrusion into the thick margin layer of one of the ramps as shown, forming an isolated positive margin of lateral size 5 mm  8 mm.
L81: cite158†Image: Refer to caption Figure 2: Single-pixel imaging of a dual ramp breast tumour phantom. (a) Schematic of the layered tissue phantom mimicking breast cancer margins, which comprises two counter-inclined linear ramps of healthy tissue phantom (20 water content), topped with thick cancerous tissue phantom (80 water content). On the lower ramp, a small positive margin is substituted into the healthy phantom layer.
L82: (b) and (c) pixel images of the photoinduced change in reflected microwave intensity of the layered phantom in (a), averaged over 11-12 GHz and 19-20 GHz spectral regions respectively. (d) and (e) as in (b) and (c) but for phase arg().
L83: Our experimental image reconstructions form a complex valued, hyperspectral data cube, with dimensions given by the spatial and frequency sampling. In Fig. 2 our images are acquired at 64  64 resolution, covering a field of view of 100 mm 100 mm and a frequency range of 11 GHz to 20 GHz with 201 equally spaced frequency samples (data cube of 64  64  201).
L84: In Fig. 2(b) and (d), we show the complex (amplitude and phase) images at the lower end of our frequency range, plotted as the spectral mean of from 11-12 GHz. In Fig. 2(c) and (e), we show the same for 19-20 GHz. A clear visual signature for the location of positive margins is present in Fig. 2(b) as dark bands of . At higher frequency in (c), the second minimum in thickness around 3 mm is clear and consistent with the modelling predictions in Fig. 1(c).
L85: Similarly the thickness dependence of the phase plots of Fig. 2(d) and (e) correlate well with the modelling predictions in Fig. 1(b). We note that the peak values of are higher than predicted for both amplitude and phase and suggest some small discrepancy between the physical and modelled system.
L86: cite159†Image: Refer to caption Figure 3: Experimental demonstration of margin depth mapping. Reconstructed margin depth distribution from the full hyperspectral dataset shown in part in Fig. 2. A photograph of the dual ramp phantom, fabricated according to the schematic in Fig. 2(a), is shown inset. Reconstructed values yielding high error, such as those outside the phantom or photomodulator region, are omitted (white).
L87: To determine the margin thickness in a given location, we compare the experimental complex valued frequency spectrum with those predicted by the transfer matrix method for different margin depths. The margin depth is calculated by minimising the spectrally averaged distance in the complex plane between the experimental data and modelled margin depth. The full details of the algorithm are given in method section cite18†III.5 .
L88: In Fig. 3, we show the margin depth determination for the hyperspectral data set featured in Fig. 2(b)-(e). We find the best results when we restrict the solution to the clinically relevant range of 0-2 mm, thereby circumventing false solutions due to higher order resonances and experimental artefacts (see supplementary Fig. S7), and ensuring that margins 2 mm are reliably classified as negative.
L89: Subtle deviations from the ramp mould shape can be observed. In the upper ramp the margin layer has set with a slight thickness gradient across the width of the ramp, yielding diagonal depth contours. The lower ramp displays the intended vertically aligned depth contours up until the depth of the positive margin inclusion, from which a meniscus appears to have formed during compression of the sample, occupying air gaps around the substituted positive margin.
L90: Most strikingly, the localised positive margin insertion is clearly identified as a bright yellow spot in Fig. 3.
L91: ###  II.3 Performance and limitations
L92: 
L93: The principal result of this study is the proof of concept margin depth reconstruction in Fig. 3. Within it, not only are positive margins clearly identified in yellow, but the reconstructed depth profiles of both ramps follow the expected linear variation with lateral position up to the 2 mm thick limit appropriate for breast margins.
L94: We target an imaging resolution comparable to the histology sectioning interval of 1-3 mm. At 6464 pixel resolution the photoexcited pixel size is 1.5 mm 1.5 mm. This coincides by design with the diffusion length of the photoexcited charge carriers in our choice of photomodulator, which is silicon with 1.2 ms effective charge carrier lifetime.
L95: Whilst this resolution is sufficient to localise the simulated cancerous protrusion (positive margin) in Fig. 2, higher diffusion limited resolution may be obtained with the use of a lower charge carrier lifetime wafer. When doing so a reduction in photomodulation efficiency is expected, but may be directly compensated for with higher illumination intensities.
L96: In this feasibility demonstration, the evaluated subsurface volume of mm100 mm 2 mm within 20 minutes aligns well with surgical timescales and with millimetric resolution is already competitive with many leading approaches to IMA, such as MRI [cite30†40 , cite31†19 ]. Notably, due to communication overheads with the VNA, less than 4 minutes of the total 20 minute imaging time is necessary for data acquisition.
L97: Considering also that the hyperspectral measurements significantly overdetermine the system, there is vast potential to reduce imaging times further, towards the hardware (DMD) defined limit of 1.6 seconds for a pixel image. In addition, our system uses continuous‑wave incoherent visible light and very low RF power (1 mW), which is intrinsically safe and non-ionizing , while the use of an entry‑level portable vector network analyser further reduces the overall system size and hardware cost.
L98: As our computational imaging approach utilises patterned visible projections via a DMD, the resolution, imaging area and imaging speed are interlinked parameters which may be electronically adjusted on-the-fly to efficiently match the excised sample. For example, a pixel dataset acquisition would take under 5 minutes with our current system.
L99: In addition, computational imaging is well suited to versatile approaches such as adaptive imaging [cite67†35 ], integrated image processing [cite68†33 ] and compressive sensing [cite69†42 ], which could increase imaging speeds beyond the hardware limitations given above.
L100: ###  II.4 Robustness to inter-patient variability
L101: It can be realistically expected that the tissue parameters we have targetted for our experimental phantoms will differ somewhat from those of fresh excised samples as these vary throughout the literature [cite70†24 , cite66†23 ]. Indeed, in supplementary Fig. S1 we show that one can expect an improvement in imaging performance using alternative literature values for tissue permittivity. Certainly these parameters will also vary from patient to patient.
L102: We therefore consider here how robust our approach is to variations in the assumed tissue parameters using our transfer matrix method model.
L103: cite160†Image: Refer to caption Figure 4: Effect of patient-specific tissue differences on model predictions. Comparison of computed margin depths (solution depth), for simulated modified input margin spectra (input margin depth). (a) Where healthy Wh and cancerous Wc tissue water contents differ to those assumed in the model (W=20, W=80). The altered permittivities are given by a linear scaling of the experimentally measured values with water content.
L104: (b) Where the discontinuity in tissue hydration between healthy and cancerous tissue is replaced with a linearly increasing hydration function of width as shown inset.
L105: In Fig. 4(a) we plot the depth of margin determined by our solver vs the ground truth simulated margin depth, for several scenarios in which the simulated margin properties differ from those assumed by the solver. This is in effect the worst case scenario, as one could incorporate fitting of the margin layer hydration levels into a more sophisticated solver.
L106: Nevertheless, when the water content of the cancerous layer is altered (circular markers), the solution is almost completely unperturbed from the ground truth dashed line solution. This almost total robustness to modest variations in the water content of the cancerous tissue (see supplementary Fig. S2 and Fig. S3 for the limits), suggests our approach will perform well when tested on real, varied, patient tissues.
L107: However this also means that in its current form our imaging system is not well positioned for distinguishing healthy glandular tissues from cancerous glandular tissues, as both tissues have high water contents [cite64†26 ]. This is a limitation that is common to many approaches to breast screening and IMA when imaging particularly dense breasts.
L108: When the healthy margin layer water content is varied (solid lines), the result is a slight over or under-reading of the margin thickness. However, this crucially results in only minor perturbations for the thickest of close margins of 1-2 mm, with the most clinically significant 1 mm depth margins unperturbed.
L109: Similarly, it is expected that for real excised tumours the boundaries between margin and tumour tissue may be less well defined, with a gradient in hydration level between the distinct tissue regions. In Fig. 4(b) we show that substituting a binary (step function) transition between the water contents of the margin and cancerous layers only has the effect of shifting the determined margin depth, up to the limit where the transition region width approaches 2 mm (supplementary Fig. S5).
L110: The resulting shift is approximately half the additional separation between the original margin and cancerous regions.
L111: ###  II.5 Conclusions
L112: We have experimentally validated a novel and affordable approach to intraoperative breast cancer margin assessment, using tissue-mimicking margin phantoms. Our microwave single-pixel imaging technique provides a step change in capability over existing radiofrequency probes, offering vastly improved imaging resolution together with the ability to quantify margin depth across the excised tumour surface.
L113: Whilst there is significant scope to improve imaging speed and resolution as discussed, the demonstrated imaging timescales, resolution and detected margin depths already support clinical feasibility [cite30†40 , cite31†19 ].
L114: Our simulations have shown our approach to be remarkably robust to inter-patient variations in the water content of both margin and cancerous tissues, with improved imaging sensitivity expected when transitioning from phantoms to real patient tissues.
L115: By identifying inadequate margins during surgery, our imaging technique could reduce the risk of local recurrence, metastisis and the need for repeat surgeries, improving patient recovery times and survival rates, whilst reducing histological and surgical workload.
L116: ##  III Method
L117: ###  III.1 Breast cancer tissue phantoms
L118: 
L119: The tissue-mimicking hydrogel phantoms were prepared following a modified version of the recipe in [cite63†25 ], described in detail in supplementary section 1. The 80% water sample consists solely of water and gelatin, with the percentages expressed by weight. For the 20% water phantom, the composition includes approximately 20% water, 3.55% gelatin, 73.36% oil mixture (a 50/50 blend of safflower oil and kerosene by volume), and the remainder is surfactant.
L120: The permittivities of the prepared constituent phantom layers are determined by waveguide transmission / reflection measurements using a VNA. Samples from the prepared low‑water‑content and high‑water‑content phantom batches are cast into a waveguide holder and characterised between 12–18 GHz using the Nicolson–Ross–Weir method [cite71†30 , cite72†49 ].
L121: The resulting permittivities can be seen in supplementary Fig. S1(c) alongside literature values from a large scale set of clinical measurements [cite64†26 , cite65†27 ] in Fig. S1(f).
L122: The measured phantom layer properties differ slightly from the literature values. The water content margin tissue layer shown in supplementary Fig. S1 contains a higher water content than the literature adipose tissue also shown. This makes our phantoms representative of tissue with a higher than 30 content of non-adipose, fibroglandular or fibroconnective tissue (the boundary for grouping patient data in [cite64†26 ]).
L123: Greater depth penetration and imaging sensitivity is predicted for tissue with the literature values shown in supplementary Fig. S1. Similarly the water content `cancerous' tissue shown in supplementary Fig. S1 exhibits a slightly elevated water content with respect to the literature malignant breast tissue, though we note the reference values are for 30, not 100 malignant tissue. Additionally Fig. 4(a) shows that our technique is robust to modest hydration discrepancies for this layer.
L124: ###  III.2 Transfer matrix modelling
L125: 
L126: The reflection from the multi-layer phantom stack is calculated using the transfer matrix method [cite73†18 ], which assumes plane wave (here at 35∘ TE) illumination and that each homogeneous layer extends infinitely in the directions parallel to the interfaces. The modelled layer properties, including a supporting substrate for the silicon wafer and plastic barrier layers to confine moisture, are described in Table cite74†1 below.
L127:  Table 1: TMM parameters    Layer Thickness [mm] Permittivity
L128:  Air (incident) 0 1
L129:  Plas. Substr. 1 2 2.25
L130:  Silicon 0.1 11.7 (10.0 + 96.0i)†
L131:  Plas. Substr. 2 0.1 2.25
L132:  `Margin' (7.1 + 3.9i)∗
L133:  Plas. Barrier 0.023 2.25
L134:  `Cancer' 10 (39.7 + 27.8i)∗
L135:  Air 0 1
L136: Transfer matrix method model parameters. † When photoexcited. ∗ At 15 GHz - frequency dependence shown in supplementary Fig. S1(c).
L137: is determined by subtracting the complex reflection of the photoexcited stack, with or without phantom sample as appropriate, from the non-photoexcited stack (Table cite74†1 ). The change in permittivity of the silicon upon 100 W/m2 white light photoexcitation is calculated using the Drude model following [cite75†1 ], photoexcited values shown in brackets). To determine the normalised image signal ( = ), is calculated in the same way including only the air, Plas. Subst. and Silicon layers in Table cite74†1 .
L138: ###  III.3 Engineered silicon photomodulator
L139: The photomodulator used consisted of a high resistivity 10,000 cm (100) float-zone silicon wafer that was 100 mm in diameter and 100 m thick. The wafer underwent a stringent wet chemical clean, which was immediately followed by transfer to the load lock of a Veeco Fiji G2 plasma-enhanced atomic layer deposition (ALD) tool. 160 cycles (20 nm) of Al2 O3 was deposited by ALD at 200 C using an O2 plasma source and trimethylaluminium precursor.
L140: The deposition was performed on both sides of the wafer to achieve symmetrical passivation. Following the Al2 O3 deposition, the wafer was annealed in a quartz tube furnace for 30 min in air at 450 C to increase the photogenerated charge carrier lifetime to 1.2 ms for the carrier densities used in this work (as shown in supplementary Fig. S6), increasing its modulation efficiency [cite75†1 ]. Further details of the ALD process are described in [cite76†14 ].
L141: ###  III.4 Single pixel imaging
L142: Our approach relies on the single-pixel imaging method (one that is intimately related to computational ghost imaging), in which the lack of spatial resolution provided by a single `bucket' detector is overcome by applying time-varying spatial modulations to the unknown light field [cite60†31 , cite61†12 ]. By combining the known sequence of projections incident on the silicon modulator (which mask the phantom) with the associated reflected microwave signal measured by the VNA, an image may be formed.
L143: Mathematically the process may be described as follows. We first vectorise the representation of the reconstructed object image , reshaping it from a pixels to a 1D column vector. We can then write:
L144:   (1)
L145: 
L146: is a matrix representing the projected patterns (Hadamard patterns in our case). The column of holds a vectorised representation of the projected pattern. is the vector of complex-valued `bucket' signals, measuring the spatial overlap between the projections and the object or field.
L147: In the intuitive case where describes the raster basis, i.e. a single `on' pixel moving with each pattern, the complex valued detector signal vector, , represents directly an image of the photoactivated change in reflection at a given frequency, when reshaped to pixels. Due to the limited photomodulation signal arising from one pixel, we opt for the more signal efficient Hadamard basis [cite77†41 , cite78†16 ] shown in Fig. 1(a).
L148: The amplitude and phase of the electric field reflected from the modulator plus phantom stack is recorded using a portable, two port VNA (Shockline MS46122B, Anritsu). The microwave beam is tramsitted and received via a pair of waveguide-coupled lens horn antennas (18810-MB12223 UBR140, Flann Microwave), positioned with front faces 35 cm from the modulator at 35 half angle as shown in Fig. 1(a).
L149: For each of the projected patterns forming the measurement basis , the microwave illumination frequency is swept by the VNA over the range 11 to 20 GHz with 201 frequency points and 10 kHz intermediate frequency bandwidth. The visible photomasks are provided by a projection system utilizing a digital micromirror device (DMD) and a white xenon arc lamp yielding an intensity of W/m2.
L150: The number of projections needed per image follows the number of pixels in the image as (where the factor of two arises due to the sequential projection of positive then negative components of a single Hadamard mask, the difference in signal emulating +/- values in the masks). For the 64 64 pixel resolution images presented, the number of projections per hyperspectral image is 8192, taking 20 minutes to acquire.
L151: We note that a significant portion of this time is between individual spectrum acquisitions and could be reduced with synchronisation between the VNA and DMD. For the normalised results presented in Fig. 2, no additional repeat readings were applied to the phantom sample (SAM) dataset, but 3 repeat hyperspectral images were acquired (in 1 hour) for the no object (REF) dataset.
L152: The dominant experimental artefact in the system is the presence of spatially varying standing wave structure in the monochromatic images (see supplementary Fig. S7), an effect which is mitigated to a degree by acquiring hyperspectral data and may be further ameliorated with radiation absorbing material, at the cost of reduced signal.
L153: As the margin depth determination algorithm necessarily returns a metric for the residual error in the `fit', we remove (white regions) portions of the FOV which are outside the dual ramp phantom by specifying a threshold error value for inclusion in the reconstruction.
L154: ###  III.5 Margin depth determination algorithm
L155: 
L156: For each pixel of the normalised images, the total spectral error between the experiment and a range of considered margins depths (up to 2 mm) is evaluated as
L157: 
L158:   (2)
L159: i.e. distance in the complex plane, summed over frequency. The value of margin depth in the transfer matrix method modelling (TMM) which minimises `Err' is chosen as the solution and the value of `Err' can be used to threshold unacceptable solutions from the depth reconstruction. The final depth reconstructions are median filtered with pixel window width to reduce high spatial frequency noise.
L160: Beyond 2 mm margin depth, the contrast in the resonance features diminish (Fig. 1(b) and (c)) and the presence of experimental noise makes the solver increasingly susceptible to identifying the `incorrect' minimum in the error function. When the maximum solution depth is capped at 2 mm, this manifests as a small discontinuity solved thickness at  mm in Fig. 3 and supplementary Fig S4.
L161: Crucially this limitation of the current experimental system arises for deep margins and does not yield false positives (see supplementary Fig. S2 and Fig. S3 for details). Furthermore we show in supplementary Fig. S1 that one can expect that in real human breast tissues the imaging contrast will be nearly doubled along with the maximum determinable margin depth.
L162: ## Funding
L163: 

