
[PDF page 1]
Efficient Sampling with Discrete Diffusion Models:
Sharp and Adaptive Guarantees
Daniil Dmitriev ∗†, Zhihan Huang ˚:, Yuting Wei :
February 17, 2026
Abstract
Diffusion models over discrete spaces have recently shown striking empirical success, yet their the-
oretical foundations remain incomplete. In this paper, we study the sampling efficiency of score-based
discrete diffusion models under a continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC) formulation, with a focus
onτ-leaping-based samplers. We establish sharp convergence guarantees for attainingεaccuracy in
Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence for both uniform and masking noising processes. For uniform discrete
diffusion, we show that theτ-leaping algorithm achieves an iteration complexity of orderrOpd{εq, with
dthe ambient dimension of the target distribution, eliminating linear dependence on the vocabulary
sizeSand improving existing bounds by a factor ofd; moreover, we establish a matching algorithmic
lower bound showing that linear dependence on the ambient dimension is unavoidable in general. For
masking discrete diffusion, we introduce a modifiedτ-leaping sampler whose convergence rate is governed
by an intrinsic information-theoretic quantity, termed theeffective total correlation, which is bounded by
dlogSbut can be sublinear or even constant for structured data. As a consequence, the sampler prov-
ably adapts to low-dimensional structure without prior knowledge or algorithmic modification, yielding
sublinear convergence rates for various practical examples (such as hidden Markov models, image data,
and random graphs). Our analysis requires no boundedness or smoothness assumptions on the score
estimator beyond control of the score entropy loss.
Contents
1 Introduction 2
1.1 Sampling efficiency and adaptivity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
1.2 Our contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.3 Notation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2 Preliminaries of discrete diffusion models 5
2.1 A continuous-time Markov chain formulation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.2 Score estimation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.3 Score-based sampling algorithms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
3 Main results 8
3.1 Uniform discrete diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
3.2 Masking discrete diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
4 Discussion 16
A Examples of low intrinsic dimensions 19
A.1 Details and formal results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
A.2 Proofs of results in Section A.1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
∗Equal contribution, alphabetical order.
†Department of Statistics and Data Science, the Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania; email:
{daniild,zhihanh,ytwei}@wharton.upenn.edu
1
arXiv:2602.15008v1  [cs.LG]  16 Feb 2026

[PDF page 2]
B Technical preparations 30
B.1 Score functions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
B.2 Technical lemmas . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
C Proofs of results in Section 3.1 33
C.1 Proof of Theorem 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
C.2 Proof of Corollary 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
C.3 Proof of Theorem 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
C.4 Efficient sampling for high-entropy distributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
D Proofs of results in Section 3.2 40
D.1 Proof of Theorem 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40
D.2 Proof of Corollary 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
D.3τ-leaping for masking discrete diffusion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
E Proofs of the main lemmas 49
E.1 Characterization ofBpq dataqandCpq dataq. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
E.2 Proof of Lemma 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
E.3 Proof of Lemma 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
E.4 Proof of Lemma 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
E.5 Proof of Lemma 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
E.6 Proof of Lemma 12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
E.7 Proof of Lemma 14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
F Proofs of the auxiliary lemmas 56
F.1 Proof of Lemma 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
F.2 Proof of Lemma 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
F.3 Proof of Lemma 13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
F.4 Proof of Lemma 15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
1 Introduction
Diffusion models have recently emerged as state-of-the-art approaches for high-fidelity image generation
and video synthesis (Dhariwal and Nichol (2021); Ho et al. (2020, 2022); Song and Ermon (2019)), and
have already led to significant scientific advances in various domains, including climate modeling, protein
structure prediction, and materials science (Li et al. (2024); Watson et al. (2023); Zeni et al. (2025)). At their
core, diffusion models are built upon two stochastic processes: a forward process that gradually corrupts the
data distribution into pure noise, and a reverse process that generates samples by learning the logarithmic
gradient of the perturbed marginals, commonly referred to as the score function.
Despite their broad empirical success, diffusion models have been predominantly developed for continuous
data. Their extension to discrete domains, such as natural language, graph-structured data, and categorical
labels, has long remained challenging, although already discussed in Sohl-Dickstein et al. (2015). This
perspective began to shift following the seminal work of Austin et al. (2021), which revealed the promise of
diffusion-based approaches in discrete settings. Analogous to the continuous case, discrete diffusion models
rely on a pair of noisy forward and reverse processes, with sampling achieved by learning appropriate ratios
of distributions. Among recent developments (Bach and Saremi (2025); Campbell et al. (2022); Ou et al.
(2025); Sahoo et al. (2024)), score-entropy discrete diffusion (SEDD) has demonstrated striking performance
in text generation (Lou et al. (2024)), challenging the long-standing dominance of autoregressive language
models. In contrast to autoregressive approaches, diffusion-based language models are not constrained to a
fixed generation order (such as left-to-right), and they naturally lend themselves to more flexible forms of
controlled generation, including conditional and structured text synthesis.
The promise of discrete diffusion models has spurred growing interest in their theoretical foundations. A
particularly influential line of work formulates discrete diffusion through the lens of continuous-time Markov
chains (CTMCs) (Campbell et al., 2022), in which the forward dynamics is governed by a carefully designed
2

[PDF page 3]
rate matrix, and the backward dynamics is approximated via a learned score function. Among the proposed
constructions, two choices have emerged as especially prominent: the uniform rate matrix, which induces
a uniform stationary distribution for the forward process, and the absorbing rate matrix, which yields a
degenerate stationary distribution with an absorbing state. In practice, the performance of the resulting
samplers depends sensitively on the choice of the rate matrix (Lou et al. (2024); von Rütte et al. (2025)).
Correspondingly, two parallel lines of work have sought to understand the sampling efficiency of discrete
diffusion models — specifically, the number of steps required to produce sufficiently accurate samples —
under these respective constructions. Representative results include Chen and Ying (2025); Liang et al.
(2025c); Pham et al. (2025); Ren et al. (2025); Zhang et al. (2025) for uniform diffusion and Chen et al.
(2025); Conforti et al. (2025); Li and Cai (2025); Liang et al. (2025b); Park et al. (2025) for masking diffusion
(also referred to as absorbing diffusion).
Existing theoretical analyses for score-based discrete diffusions suggest that convergence rates typically
scale at least linearly with both the vocabulary sizeSand the ambient dimensiond. Such scaling can quickly
become prohibitive in applications; for instance, in GPT-2-based tasks, the vocabulary size isS“50,257and
the dimension isd“10 2 „10 3 (Lou et al., 2024). These considerations naturally motivate a fundamental
question:
How efficient are discrete diffusion models? When is sublinear convergence possible?
1.1 Sampling efficiency and adaptivity
To put our discussion in context, there has been substantial progress in understanding the sample efficiency
of continuous diffusion models. Seminal work by Chen et al. (2023b) characterizes the iteration complexity
of the DDPM sampler under Lipschitz (or smoothness) assumptions on the score functions across all steps.
Subsequent studies significantly relax these conditions and establish convergence guarantees for broader
classes of continuous distributions (Benton et al., 2024; Chen et al., 2023a; Li et al., 2023). Nevertheless,
it is now well understood that for general distributions, a linear dependence on the ambient dimensiondis
unavoidable. By contrast, when the target distribution exhibits additional structure — such as Gaussian
mixture models or support on low-dimensional manifolds — a growing body of work shows that popular
samplers can adaptively exploit intrinsic low-dimensional geometry, achieving improved efficiency without
explicit dimension reduction (see, e.g., Huang et al. (2024); Li et al. (2025); Li and Yan (2024); Liang et al.
(2025a)).
The landscape shifts considerably as we move to discrete diffusion models. Under the CTMC formulation,
algorithms such as Gillespie’s method and uniformization allow for exact simulation of the reverse process,
free of discretization error (Chen and Ying, 2025; Gillespie, 1976; Van Dijk, 1992). However, these methods
suffer from high computational costs in high-dimensional settings. Moreover, their convergence guarantees
are inherently stochastic, as they depend on a random number of transitions. An alternative and widely
adopted approach, particularly in diffusion-based language models, is provided byτ-leaping and its variants,
including truncatedτ-leaping (Campbell et al., 2022; Gillespie, 2001). Originally developed in chemical
kinetics,τ-leaping replaces sequential state transitions with parallel updates across coordinates, offering
substantial computational gains in large systems. Yet, our theoretical understanding ofτ-leaping remains
incomplete. Current state-of-the-art results exhibit at least linear dependence on the vocabulary sizeS,
linear dependence ondfor the absorbing case, and quadratic dependence ondfor the uniform case (Conforti
et al. (2025); Liang et al. (2025b,c)); see Table 1 for more details. It remains an open question whether these
dependencies are fundamental information-theoretic barriers or merely analytical artifacts. Furthermore, as
in the continuous setting, an ideal sampling algorithm should automatically adjust to the intrinsic difficulty
of the target distribution. For example, one would expect substantially faster convergence for Dirac delta
measures or uniform target distributions, without prior knowledge of the structure or modifications to the
algorithm. Existing analyses ofτ-leaping do not illuminate whether such adaptivity is possible. More
specifically, we aim to address the following question:
Can score-based samplers automatically adapt to structured target distributions?
3

[PDF page 4]
1.2 Our contributions
The contributions of this work are centered on establishing sharp convergence guarantees for discrete dif-
fusion models, bridging the gap between empirical success and theoretical understanding. Specifically, our
contributions are mainly threefold:
•Optimal rates for uniform diffusion: We establish that for the uniform diffusion process, the
τ-leaping sampler requires only rOpd{εqdiscretization steps to achieve anε-error in KL divergence.
This result significantly sharpens the previously best-known bound ofrOpd2S{εq(Liang et al., 2025c),
effectively removing a factor ofdand the dependence on the vocabulary sizeS.
•Fundamental lower bounds: We demonstrate that the linear dependence on the dimensiondis
essentially unimprovable for theτ-leaping algorithm. Specifically, we show that under uniform dif-
fusion, anopdqcomplexity bound is unattainable unless the target distribution is already proximal
to the uniform measure. This result characterizes a fundamental price of sampling for informative
distributions.
•Adaptivity for masking diffusion: For the masking diffusion process, we introduce a refinedτ-
leaping sampler that has a complexity governed byrOpD{εq, whereDis the effective total correlation,
an information-theoretic measure of the target distribution’s intrinsic complexity. Notably, whileDis
always bounded by the classical total correlation and the dual total correlation (and thus bydlogS), it
can be sublinear or evenOp1qfor highly structured data, allowing our sampler to adapt automatically
to low-dimensional target distributions.
In contrast to prior work, our upper bounds do not require the boundedness of the score estimator or
any auxiliary regularity assumptions beyond control of the score entropy loss. The key technical ingredients
include a Girsanov change-of-measure argument, combined with establishing the martingale properties of the
sampling dynamics. The latter effectively separates the approximation error from the discretization error,
allowing each to be analyzed independently. For the lower bound, we leverage a log-Sobolev inequality to-
gether with a strong data-processing inequality along the uniform noising process. To demonstrate the scope
of our adaptivity results for masking discrete diffusion, we present several examples whose analysis requires
careful constructions and delicate control of information-theoretic quantities, which may be of independent
interest.
1.3 Notation
For a positive integern, we definerns:“ t1, . . . , nuand letI n PR nˆn denote the identity matrix. Letdą0
denote the number of dimensions,Są0denote the vocabulary size andTą0denote the time horizon.
LetMASKdenote a special value outside ofrSs. LetX :“V d denote the domain, where, depending on the
context,V :“ rSsorV :“ rSs Y tMASKu. We denote the set of all distributions onXbyPpXq. LetH,
KL, andIdenoteentropy,Kullback-Leibler (KL) divergence, andmutual information, respectively. Letδ x
denote the Dirac measure at pointx. We adopt the standard asymptotic notationOp¨q,Ωp¨q,Θp¨q,À, and
!. Additionally, rOp¨q, rΩp¨q, and rΘp¨qare defined analogously, except that the logarithmic dependency on
d, S,1{ε, and1{δis hidden. For a vectorx“ px 1, x2, . . . , xdq PX,iP rds, andcPV, we define vectors
x´i :“ px1, . . . , xi´1, xi`1, . . . , xdq, andx‘ i c,xd i cPXas follows:
•px‘ i cqj “x j for allj‰i, andpx‘ i cqi “ px i `cqmod|V| 1,
•pxd i cqj “x j for allj‰i, andpxd i cqi “c,
Forx, yPX, we denote the Hamming distance byd Hpx, yq :“|tiP rds:x i ‰y iu|, and forxP prSs Y
tMASKuqd, we denotempxq :“|tiP rds,such thatx i “MASKu|.
1In this case, we assume thatVhas additive structure. We only apply this notation whenV“ rSs. We use the convention
that0 modS“S.
4

[PDF page 5]
Paper Noising
process
Score Est.
Assump.
No Early
Stopping Sampler Iteration
Complexity Adaptation
Ren et al. (2025) Uniform Bounded % τ-leaping d2S2{ε %
Liang et al.
(2025c) Uniform Bounded % τ-leaping d2S{ε %
Our work,
Theorems 1&2 Uniform No requirement ! τ-leaping d{ε ˚ %
Liang et al.
(2025b) Masking Bounded % τ-leaping dS{ε %
Conforti et al.
(2025) Masking ˆst «s t % DMPM dS{ε %
Our work,
Theorem 3
Masking No requirement ! Algorithm 1 D{ε !
Table1: Comparisonwithpriorwork. Logarithmicfactorsintheiterationcomplexityareomitted. Renetal.
(2025) and Liang et al. (2025b) describe bounds without early stopping under more stringent assumptions on
thetargetdistribution, thescorefunction, orthescoreestimator. TheboundinConfortietal.(2025)depends
on additional quantities involving the score estimator beyond Assumption 1, which are small whenever
st «ˆst. The quantityD(defined in Eqn. (16)), is upper bounded bydlogpSqand captures the intrinsic low-
dimensional structure of the target distribution. Entry marked with˚indicates sharp rates, with matching
lower bounds established in Theorem 2.
2 Preliminaries of discrete diffusion models
2.1 A continuous-time Markov chain formulation
Our goal is to modeld-dimensional discrete dataX0 “ pX 1
0 , X2
0 , . . . , Xd
0 q P rSs d. Letq data “q 0 denote the
probability mass function (p.m.f.) ofX 0 from which we aim to sample, and letqi
0 be the marginal p.m.f.
of thei-th coordinate. Analogous to continuous diffusion models, their discrete counterparts consist of a
forward and a reverse process over the discrete space.
The forward process.We define a forward noising process that progressively transforms the data distri-
butionq 0 to a distributionqT that is close to an easy-to-sample distribution. This process is modeled using
a continuous-time Markov chain (CTMC).
Definition 1(Continuous-time Markov chain).ACTMCwith an initial distributionq 0 and rate matrices
pQtqtPr0,Ts is a right-continuous stochastic processpxtqtPr0,Ts such that
•px tqtPr0,Ts satisfies theMarkov property: for any0ďsătďT, the conditional distribution ofx t
given the historytxu, uďsudepends only onx s,
•for any0ďtăT, the transition probabilities satisfy, as∆tÑ0 `:
Prpxt`∆t “y|x t “xq “Itx“yu `Q tpx, yq∆t`op∆tq.(1)
Here, the rate matrices satisfyQtpx, yq ě0for allx‰yPXandQ tpx, xq “ ´ ř
y‰x Qtpx, yq.
We refer to Feinberg et al. (2014); Feller (1940) for a rigorous treatment of CTMCs. For a givenq0, the
marginalspq tqtPr0,Ts satisfying Eqn. (1) are the solutions to theKolmogorov forward equation:
dqt
dt “Q J
t qt,for0ďtďT.
The reverse process.For such a CTMC, there exists a time-reversed process with an initial distribution
qT, rate matricesp
Ð
QtqtPr0,Ts, and marginalsp
Ð
q tqtPr0,Ts, such thatqt ”
Ð
q T´t, fortP r0, Ts. The forward and
5

[PDF page 6]
reverse rate matrices are explicitly related (Campbell et al., 2022) by
Ð
Qtpx, yq “Q T´t py, xq qT´t pyq
qT´t pxq ,forx‰yPXand0ďtďT.(2)
In this paper, we focus on rate matrices that satisfy three conditions:
1. they are time-homogeneous,Qt ”Q,
2.Qpx, yq “0wheneverd Hpx, yq ě2,
3. ifd Hpx, yq “1andx i ‰y i, thenQpx, yq “Q tokpxi, yiq, for some fixed matrixQtok.
In particular, we consider two important instances of CTMCs that are widely adopted in practice, namely
theuniform noising processand themasking(or absorbing)noising process, which are defined through the
choice ofQ tok.
•uniform noising process: A CTMC is auniform noising processif fora‰bP rSs
Qtokpa, bq “1{S.(3)
This CTMC converges to the uniform distribution on the domainX:“ rSs d in the limit.
•masking noising process: A CTMC on the domainX :“ prSs Y tMASKuq d is amasking noising
processif fora‰bP rSs Y tMASKu
Qtokpa, bq “Ita‰MASKandb“MASKu.(4)
ThecorrespondingCTMCconvergestotheDiracmeasurepδ MASKqbd astÑ 8. Notethatweconstrain
the initial distributionq0 to be supported on non-masked data, i.e., onrSsd.
2.2 Score estimation
Recall that the reverse process is a CTMC with rate matrices satisfying the relation (2), which is similar
to the reverse process in the continuous case. The density ratio here generalizes the typical score function
∇x logq tpxqin the continuous case and is often referred to as the (concrete) score function for discrete
diffusion models (Meng et al., 2022). Formally, we definethe score functionstpy, xqas
stpy, xq “ qtpyq
qtpxq ,forx‰yPX.
Score entropy loss.For both the uniform and masking noising processes, the marginalspqtq, and conse-
quently the score function, are intractable in general. In practice, one therefore resorts to an approximation
pstpy, xqof the true score functionstpy, xq, which is learned from data sampled from the target distributionq0.
To evaluate the quality of the estimated score, a widely used loss function is thescore entropy loss, originally
introduced in Lou et al. (2024), which has since become the de facto standard for training score-based dis-
crete diffusion models. This loss provides a principled objective for matching the approximate scorepst to the
true score induced by the forward diffusion process. Specifically, fortě0and functionsps, s:XˆXÑR `,
the score entropy lossLSE is defined as follows:
LSEpt,ps, sq:“E x„qt
” ÿ
y‰x
Qtpy, xqspy, xqDppspy, xq, spy, xqq
ı
ě0.
Here, fora, bě0, the Bregman divergence forϕpaq “a´logais given by
Dpa, bq :“ a
b ´1´log a
b ě0.
In practice, to implement any sampling algorithm, one has to discretize the continuous dynamics and
obtain score estimates at discrete time steps. Suppose that the score estimatespsT´t are obtained at discrete
time points0ďt 0 ăt 1 ă. . .ăt N ďT. We make the following standard assumption regarding the score
estimation errors.
6

[PDF page 7]
parallel updates CTMC-based
Euler method
Tweedieτ-leaping
τ-leaping alg.
Truncatedτ-leaping
Algorithm 1
τ-bridging
Gillespie’s alg.
Uniformization
DMPM
Figure 1: Overview of score-based samplers. The left part comprises score-based samplers that allow parallel
updates, defined asτ-leaping strategies in Lou et al. (2024). The right part consists of samplers that can be
defined through the CTMC framework. At the intersection areτ-bridging strategies, defined in Eqn. (8).
Assumption 1(Approximation error).LetNą0and0ďt 0 ăt 1 ă. . .ăt N ďT. We assume that
N´1ÿ
k“0
ptk`1 ´t kqLSEpT´t k,psT´t k , sT´t k q ďε score.(5)
This assumption is concerned with the aggregated estimation errors over allNsteps. Several works have
constructed estimates that satisfy this assumption; examples include Benton et al. (2024); Lou et al. (2024);
Ou et al. (2025).
2.3 Score-based sampling algorithms
Armed with the score estimatesppsT´t qtPtt0,...,tN u, we aim to construct a generative modelpq0 that approxi-
mates the data distributionq0. A natural approach proposed in Campbell et al. (2022) is to define a surrogate
CTMC that starts from an easy-to-sample distributionp0 «q T and approximates the backward dynamics
in (2). Concretely, we define the time-inhomogeneous rate matrix
pQtpx, yq “Q T´t py, xqpsT´t py, xq.(6)
In practice, score estimates are only available on a fixed discretizationτ“ pt0, . . . , tN q, and extending these
estimates to the full intervalr0, Tsintroducesdiscretization error.
τ-leapingalgorithm.Asmentionedabove, awidelyadoptedsampleristheτ-leapingalgorithm(Campbell
et al., 2022), which approximates Eqn. (6) with multiple possible transitions within each discretization
interval. Formally, forkP t0, . . . , N´1uandtP rt k, tk`1q, givenx tk andpsT´t k,τ-leaping obtainsx tk`1
as a random vector whose coordinates are sampled independently viadone-dimensional CTMCs. For each
iP rds, the initial distribution isδxi
tk
and the rate matrices are given by2:
pQi
tpa, bq “ psT´t k pxtk , xtk ‘i pb´aqq,fora‰bPV.(7)
TheformulationinEqn.(7)requireseitheranadditivestructureonthestatespaceortherestrictionthateach
coordinate undergoes at most one transition between discretization points. Existing analyses for uniform and
masking diffusions (Campbell et al., 2022; Liang et al., 2025c) adopt the latter assumption. In Section 3.1,
we explore the necessity of this requirement for the uniform noising process. Lou et al. (2024) generalizesτ-
leaping by introducing a class of samplers termedτ-leaping strategies, which allow arbitrary transformations
xi
tk`1 “f i
kppsT´t k , xtk q. Both the Euler method and Tweedieτ-leaping fall into this class. However, they
remain challenging for direct theoretical analysis due to the absence of a CTMC structure.
2The algorithm admits an equivalent Poisson formulation, in whichdSPoisson random variables corresponding to coordinate-
value transitions are sampled and applied in parallel.
7

[PDF page 8]
This paper:τ-bridging strategies.We introduce a structured class of samplers that generalizes theτ-
leaping algorithm. We name this class of algorithmsτ-bridging strategies, which retain the parallel updating
structure while remaining analytically tractable. Aτ-bridging strategy generatesxtk`1 fromx tk by evolving
dindependent one-dimensional CTMCs onrt k, tk`1q. For each coordinateiP rds, the chain is initialized at
δxi
tk
and has the rate matrix given by
pQi
t “G i
tppsT´t k , xtk q,(8)
for some mappingGi
t :R XˆX
` ˆXÑR VˆV. Compared to generalτ-leaping strategies,τ-bridging strategies
restrict updates to CTMC-based transitions. This restriction preserves parallel coordinate updates while
facilitating theoretical analysis. Figure 1 summarizes the relationships between these classes of sampling
algorithms.
A representative instance of aτ-bridging sampler is thetruncatedτ-leapingsampler of Liang et al.
(2025c). ForkP rNsandtP rt k, tk`1q, the corresponding rate matrices take the form:
Gi
tppsT´t k , xtk qpa, bq “psT´t k pxtk , xtk di bqItxi
tk “aufora‰bPV.(9)
The indicatorItx i
tk “auenforces the constraint that at most one transition occurs per coordinateiP rds
within each discretization intervalrtk, tk`1q. In Section 3.2, we show that an instance of this scheme achieves
sublinear complexity for the masking noising process under mild distributional assumptions. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first result establishing such a guarantee.
3 Main results
In this section, we characterize the sampling efficiency of theτ-bridging strategies for both the uniform and
masking noising processes. We develop sharp convergence guarantees and highlight cases where adaptivity
is automatically achieved. We provide proof sketches for all results in this section, with full proofs deferred
to the appendix.
3.1 Uniform discrete diffusion
3.1.1 A sharp convergence characterization
We begin with the uniform discrete diffusion models, whose forward dynamics are given by the uniform
noising process. We establish explicit sampling guarantees for theτ-leaping algorithm, measured in KL
divergence. The proof is given in Appendix C.1.
Theorem 1.Letq data “q 0 be the data distribution onX :“ rSs d. For0“t 0 ăt 1 ă. . .ăt N “T, let
∆ :“max kttk`1 ´t ku “Op1q. Setp 0 “UnifpXq. Under Assumption 1, theτ-leaping algorithm initialized
atp 0 generates a sample frompoutput “p T such that
KLpqdata }p outputq Àε score `e ´T dlogpSq `∆dlogpS{∆q.(10)
As expected, the KL divergence bound in Theorem 1 decomposes into three terms. The first termεscore
quantifies the quality of score estimation and captures the accumulation of estimation errors over theN
discretization steps. The second term corresponds to the initialization error, arising from initializing the
sampler with the uniform distributionp 0 instead of the true terminal distributionq T; this term decays
exponentially with the diffusion horizonT. Finally, the third term accounts for the discretization error
incurred by approximating the continuous-time reverse process with a discrete-timeτ-leaping scheme.
To further interpret Theorem 1 and place it in context with existing results, we highlight several of its
salient features. First, the discretization error scales linearly with the dimensiondand only logarithmically
with the vocabulary sizeS. This matches the result obtained for the random walk model (Conforti et al.,
2025) and reveals that the discretization error is insensitive to the distribution scale, as has been shown for
continuous diffusion models (e.g., Huang et al. (2024)). Second, the theorem permits a flexible choice of
step size schedules and does not require early stopping. In contrast to prior analyses that rely on carefully
selected step sizes and introduce an early stopping timeδ(where the algorithm outputsp T´δ in place of
8

[PDF page 9]
pT), the bound in Theorem 1 depends only on the maximum step size. Moreover, the same bound applies
uniformly to early stopping variants: the right-hand side of (10) remains unchanged for anyδ!1.
The only requirement we have on score estimation is Assumption 1, with no additional boundedness or
regularity conditions (typically assumed in the existing literature). As a result, the theorem applies to a
broad class of score estimation procedures commonly used in practice. We provide a sketch of its proof to
illustrate the main proof ideas.
Proof sketch of Theorem 1.In view of the data-processing inequality and the chain rule for KL divergence,
we upper bound the KL divergence betweenq0 andp T by the KL divergence between the pathsqT´t 0,...,T´t N
andp t0,...,tN, which can be decomposed as
KLpq0 }p T q ďKLpq T´t 0,...,T´t N }p t0,...,tN q
“KLpq T }p 0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
Extk „
Ð
q tk
”
KL
´Ð
q tk`1|tk p¨|xtk q }p tk`1|tk p¨|xtk q
¯ı
.
The first term is the initialization error, which can be upper bounded by the log-Sobolev inequality in
Lemma 7. For the second term, we apply Girsanov’s change-of-measure theorem for continuous-time Markov
chains to obtain the following upper bound:
1
S
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtqD
`
psT´t k pxtk ‘i c, xtk q, sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
˘
dt.
The details can be found around Eqn. (67).
To further control the right-hand side, we apply the law of cosines for Bregman divergence and derive
that (withℓ :“t k)
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtqD
`
psT´t k pxtk ‘i c, xtk q, sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
˘
“
ÿ
yℓ:dHpyℓ,xℓq“1
sT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqD
`
psT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓq, sT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓq
˘
lo oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo omo oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo on
Controlled by Assumption 1
`
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
`
sT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
˘
log psT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq
looooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
Expectation controlled by Lemma 8
`
ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
`
´logs tpyt, xtq
˘
´
ÿ
yℓ:dHpyℓ,xℓq“1
`
´logs T´ℓ pyℓ, xℓq
˘
.
The first term can be controlled by Assumption 1 after taking the expectation overxℓ „
Ð
q ℓ and integrating
over time. The second term can be shown to be zero with the help of Lemma 8 after taking the expectation
overx t „
Ð
q t|ℓp¨ |x ℓq. Thus, the problem boils down to upper bounding the third term above, whose
properties are characterized in Lemma 10. After taking the expectation and integrating over time, we can
upper bound the third term by∆dlogpS{∆q. Combining the bounds for all three terms completes the
proof.
Next, we specialize Theorem 1 to the concrete choice of a discretization schedule to derive the iteration
complexity required to obtain anε-accurate sampler in KL divergence. For a simple step size schedule, it
turns out thatd{εsteps (up to logarithmic factors) suffice for convergence, significantly improving on the
state-of-the-art complexity ofd2S{εfrom Liang et al. (2025c). Refer to Appendix C.2 for the proof.
Corollary 1.For the setting in Theorem 1 andεą0, the output of theτ-leaping algorithm with constant
step size scheduletk`1 ´t k “T{NforkP rN´1s, achieves
KLpqdata }p outputq Àε score `ε,
9

[PDF page 10]
provided that the time horizonT“logpdlogpSq{εqand the iteration number
N“ rO
ˆ d
ε
˙
.(11)
Remark1 (Step size schedule).In Corollary 1, we adopt the constant step size schedule for simplicity. This
choice is optimal in the sense that it minimizes the worst-case upper bound for a fixed number of stepsN,
and it is also empirically effective (Campbell et al., 2022). However, other step size schedules commonly
used in practice and theory achieve the same iteration complexity, including the exponential-then-constant
schedule (defined as in Corollary 2 and used in Liang et al. (2025c)) and the log-linear schedule (Lou et al.,
2024). In these works, early stopping is introduced to maintain numerical stability in score estimation during
training and also to ensure a small discretization error. Our result shows that, under Assumption 1, early
stopping is not necessary for a small discretization error.
3.1.2 A matching lower bound forτ-leaping
While Theorem 1 establishes an upper bound for theτ-leaping algorithm scaling nearly linearly with the
dimensiondand logarithmically with the vocabulary sizeS, the fundamental question remains: is this
dependence an intrinsic limit or merely a technical artifact? We show that the former is indeed the case by
establishing a matching lower bound.
We note that for target distributions sufficiently close to the uniform distribution, sampling can be
achieved with very few steps, as the forward CTMC converges efficiently to its limit. To avoid these patho-
logical instances, we restrict our focus to the class of distributions that remain sufficiently well-separated
from the uniform distribution. Specifically, for anyγP r0,1s, define the subsetPγpXq ĎPpXqas
P γpXq “
␣
q0 PPpXq:Hpq 1q ď p1´γq ¨HpUnifpXqq “ p1´γqdlogpSq
(
,
whereq 1 is the marginal distribution att“1of the uniform noising process initialized atq0, UnifpXqis the
uniform distribution onX, andHp¨qdenotes the entropy function of a distribution. Intuitively, forγP p0,1q,
the classP γpXqimposes a structural constraint on the convergence of the forward process; it describes
distributions that do not mix rapidly. In this sense, forγ“Op1q,PγpXqcontains distributions that remain
informative enough at timet“1in the forward process. This covers most distributions of practical interest,
since they carry nontrivial information characterized by relatively low entropy.
The following lower bound shows that, when sampling from a distribution inPγpXqwith theτ-leaping
algorithm, the iteration complexity bound in Corollary 1 cannot be improved up to logarithmic factors. The
proof is given in Appendix C.3.
Theorem 2.For any target distributionq 0 PP γpXqand early stopping time0ďδ!1, denote the path
measure of the backward process byQ d“ t
Ð
q tutPr0,T´δs and the sampling process byP d“ tp tutPr0,T´δs. Let
γ“Ωp1q. Then, for any step size schedule0“t 0 ăt 1 ă. . .ăt N “T´δwithmax kttk`1 ´t ku ď 1
2, it
takes theτ-leaping algorithm at least
N“ΩpdlogpSqq(12)
iterations to achieve
KLpQ}Pq ďε score `Op1q.
We make several remarks concerning the nature and implications of our lower bound.
Theorem 2 reveals that for informative target distributions inPγpXq, ensuring that the KL divergence
between the sampling process and the reverse process is small requires the number of steps to scale at least
linearly with the dimensiond, which cannot be avoided for general distributions. In addition, the lower
bound is uniform over both early stopping schedules (0ăδ!1) and non-early stopping schemes (δ“0).
This lower bound is algorithm-dependent: it relies on structural properties of theτ-leaping algorithm and
therefore differs fundamentally from information-theoretic or minimax lower bounds. In principle, alternative
sampling schemes may circumvent the linear dependence ond. Indeed, in Section 3.2, we show that a
10

[PDF page 11]
modifiedτ-leaping procedure achieves sublinear dependence ondfor structured target distributions under
the masking noising process. Whether analogous improvements are possible for uniform discrete diffusion
through modified algorithms remains an open question.
When the target distribution has high entropy, the lower bound need not apply. Indeed, whenqdata
satisfiesKLpq data}UnifpXqq “opdq, one can show thatHpq 1q “ΘpdlogSq, and that a sample from a
distribution with the KL error at mostεscore `εcan be obtained usingN“opdqsteps. A precise formulation
of this claim is given in Appendix C.4.
We remark that the quantity controlled in Theorem 2 is the KL divergence between two path measures,
rather than the divergence between the terminal output distributions, which may appear weaker than the
upper bound in Corollary 1. However, to the best of our knowledge, all existing upper-bound analyses for
the KL divergence, including ours, proceed by first bounding the KL divergence between path measures and
then invoking the data-processing inequality. Consequently, the lower bound applies to all current analysis
techniques. In this sense, Theorem 2 establishes the optimality of the iteration complexity in Corollary 1
within the scope of the existing analysis techniques.
Finally, we provide the proof sketch of Theorem 2 to illustrate the main proof techniques.
Proof sketch of Theorem 2.The proof is based on a refined analysis of the decay of KL divergence along the
forward process for any distributionq0 PP γpXq. While we state our result forγ“Ωp1q, the proof works
for everyγP p0,1q.It can be shown that the KL divergence along the forward process is a differentiable
function of timet, and we denote its negative rate of change asφptq, i.e.,
φptq “ ´ d
dt KLpqt}p0q “
ÿ
x,y:dHpx,yq“1
qtpxqstpy, xqlog
ˆ stpy, xq
stpx, yq
˙
,
wherep 0 “UnifpXqis the limit distribution of the forward noising process. First, we show that the condition
KLpQ}Pq ďε score `Op1qwith the definition ofP γpXqimplies thatTą1and the following bound
N´1ÿ
k“1
ż tk`1
tk
`
φpT´tq ´φpT´t kq
˘
dt“Op1q.(13)
Furthermore, we can show thatφptqis a non-increasing and differentiable function oft. Thus, Eqn. (13) and
the Newton-Leibniz formula lead to a stronger condition:
N´1ÿ
k“1
inf
tkďtďtk`1
p´φ1pT´tqq ¨ 1
2 ptk`1 ´t kq2 ď
N´1ÿ
k“1
ż tk`1
tk
ż T´t k
T´t
´φ1puqdudt
“
N´1ÿ
k“1
ż tk`1
tk
`
φpT´tq ´φpT´t kq
˘
“Op1q.(14)
Next, we view the forward process as anS-ary symmetric channel (Makur and Polyanskiy, 2018) and apply
the strong data-processing inequality to prove that for anyq0 PP γpXq, the function´φ 1ptqhas a lower
bound scaling withγdlogpSqfor alltP p0,1q. Sincemax kttk`1 ´t ku ď 1
2, we can choose a suitableM, such
that1ăMăNandT´t M P r 1
2 ,1s. Combining this with Eqn. (14), we obtain
N´1ÿ
k“M
ptk`1 ´t kq2 À 1
γdlogpSq ,
which implies thatN“ΩpγdlogpSqqby the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality.
3.2 Masking discrete diffusion
We now turn our attention to the masking noising process. Our main result in this setting is an upper bound
that intrinsically depends on the structural properties of the target distributionqdata, rather than scaling
with the ambient dimensiond. This aligns with the intuition that for highly structured distributions — such
as a sparse mixture of Dirac measures — a sensible sampler should converge at a sublinear scale, or perhaps
even logarithmically withd.
11

[PDF page 12]
3.2.1 Preliminaries
We begin by recalling two fundamental quantities in information theory: the total correlation and the dual
total correlation. For a distributionqoverrSs d andx„q, the total correlationCpqqand the dual total
correlationBpqqare defined as
Cpqq :“
dÿ
i“1
Hpxiq ´HpxqandBpqq :“Hpxq ´
dÿ
i“1
Hpxi |x ´iq.(15)
We now introduce a time-dependent quantity associated with the masking noising process. Consider a
masking noising process defined by Eqn. (4) with marginalspqtqtě0. ForxP prSsYtMASKuq d andi‰jP rds,
letx ´pi,jq denote the collection of all unmasked elements ofx, excluding thei-th and thej-th coordinates.
We define theeffective total correlationof the target distribution as
Dpq0q :“
ż 8
0
minp1, tqIptqdtwithIptq :“
ÿ
i‰jPrds
Ipxi
t;x j
t |x ´pi,jq
t q ě0,(16)
whereIpA;B|Cqdenotes the conditional mutual information, andx t „q t. Lemma 16 shows that the total
correlation and the dual total correlation can be expressed throughIptqby
Bpq0q “
ż 8
0
IptqdtandCpq 0q “
ż 8
0
pet ´1qIptqdt.
Consequently,Dpq 0q ďminpBpq 0q,Cpq 0qq. The statement and the proof of this result are given in Ap-
pendix E.1.
Note that bothBpq 0q,Cpq 0q, and henceDpq 0qare upper bounded bydlogpSq. Moreover, there exist
distributionsq 0 withBpq 0q “Op1qwhileCpq 0q “ΩpdlogpSqq, and vice versa. We refer to Austin (2020) for
a detailed study of the total correlation and the dual total correlation. Importantly, there are also natural
distributions for which bothBpq0qandCpq 0qare of orderd, whileDpq 0qremains small. See Proposition 5
for an example of such a distribution.
3.2.2 An adaptive characterization
Equipped with the above preliminaries, we present our main result on the masking noising process. The
proof is given in Appendix D.1.
Theorem 3.Letq data “q 0 be the target distribution onrSs d. For0“t 0 ăt 1 ă. . .ăt N “T, let
hk :“t k`1 ´t k be the step sizes and assume that∆:“max k hk “Op1q. Let
p0 :“
˜
`
1´e ´T ˘
δMASK `S ´1e´T
Sÿ
k“1
δk
¸bd
.
Under Assumption 1, Algorithm 1 initialized atp0 produces a sample frompoutput “p T such that
KLpqdata }p outputq Àε score `e ´T dlogpSq `
N´1ÿ
k“0
hk
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
Iptqdt.(17)
A few remarks on the consequences and implications of Theorem 3 are in order.
As in Theorem 1, the last term in the upper bound corresponds to the discretization error measured using
the integrated mutual information defined in Eqn. (16). While the first two terms are generic, the third term
governs the dependence on the dimensiondand reflects the information-theoretic properties of the target
distribution. For structured distributions, our algorithm implicitly adapts to the underlying structure of
the target distribution without requiring any prior knowledge of that structure or any modification to the
algorithm itself.
12

[PDF page 13]
Algorithm 1:Modified truncatedτ-leaping
Input:
Initial distribution:p 0,
Discretization steps:0“t 0 ăt 1 ă. . .ăt N “T,
Score estimate function:psT´t fortP tt 0, . . . , tN´1 u.
Output:SamplepxP rSs d.
1Samplex 0 fromp 0
2fork“0, . . . , N´1do
3foriPmpx tk q:“ ti, such thatx i
tk “MASKudo
4 pQi
kpaq ÐpsT´t k pxtk di a, xtk q, foraP rSs
5 pQi
kpMASKq Ð ´ ř
aPrSs pQi
kpaq
6ifkăN´1then
7∆ k Ð pe T´t k ´1qlog
´
eT ´etk
eT ´etk`1
¯
8P k Ðexpp pQi
kpMASKq∆kq
9end
10else
11P k Ð0
12end
13x i
tk`1 Ð
$
&
%
MASK,with probabilityP k,
a,with probability
pQi
kpaqř
bPrSs
pQi
kpbq p1´P kq,foraP rSs.
14end
15end
16returnx tN
In Appendix D.3, we analyze the performance of truncatedτ-leaping as an alternative to Algorithm 1,
which has an additionald{N2 term in the upper bound Eqn. (17), ignoring lower-order contributions. Al-
though for structured target distributions the resulting iteration complexity already scales as
?
drather
thand(as in the existing literature), it does not fully adapt to the geometry of the target distribution. To
provide some intuition, the standard (or truncated)τ-leaping algorithm informally satisfies fortP rtk, tk`1q
(see Eqn. (9))
Gi
tpsT´t k , xtk q «G i
tk psT´t k , xtk q,and thus pQt «
Ð
Qtk ,(18)
where we recall the mappingGi
t from Eqn. (8). That is, even when the score estimation is exact,psT´t k ”
sT´t k, theτ-leaping algorithm introduces a mismatch between the surrogate and true rate matrices as
sT´t k ıs T´t. Algorithm 1 corrects this discrepancy by enforcing
Gi
tpsT´t k , xtk q «G i
tpsT´t , xtk q,and thus pQt «
Ð
Qt,(19)
through the rescaling of the score estimate function:psT´t “ eT´t k ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´t k. As it is a linear transformation
of the score estimate function, we can simulate its dynamics only at discrete pointsT´t 0, . . . , T´t N
(see Algorithm 1 and Lemma 13). This leads to a sharper upper bound in Theorem 3 relative to the analogous
bound for truncatedτ-leaping (Theorem 5; see also Remark 3). Empirically, the benefit of rescaling the score
function in masking discrete diffusion models has also been observed in prior work; see, for example, Lou
et al. (2024); Ou et al. (2025).
Notably, our results are closely connected to an intriguing parallel line of work on the masking diffusion
models (Chen et al. (2025); Li and Cai (2025)), which focuses on the design of unmasking schedules without
adopting a CTMC perspective. In particular, Chen et al. (2025) derives optimal unmasking schedules
and discusses two representative instances in which the number of steps scales linearly withBpqdataqand
Cpqdataq, respectively. Their algorithms require an a priori estimate ofBpqdataqandCpq dataqor a doubling
search procedure to calibrate the unmasking schedule and rely on a different sampling mechanism. The
13

[PDF page 14]
fact that our score-based sampler automatically exploits similar information-theoretic quantities without
additional hyperparameters underscores both the fundamental nature of these quantities and the robustness
of the CTMC framework.
Below we provide a proof sketch of Theorem 3 with the details deferred to Appendix D.1.
Proof sketch of Theorem 3.First, Lemma 13 shows that Algorithm 1 outputs a sample from a CTMC with
initial distributionp 0 and rate matrices
pQtpx, yq :“
$
’&
’%
psT´t k pxtk di yi, xtk q eT´t k ´1
eT´t ´1 Itxi “MASKu,ifd Hpx, yq “1, x i ‰y i,andx i
tk “MASK,
´ ř
z‰x pQtpx, zq,ify“x,
0,otherwise.
(20)
This corresponds to aτ-bridging strategy (Eqn. (8)) with the following functionGi
tppsT´t k , xtk q:
Gi
tppsT´t k , xtk qpa, bq “ eT´t k ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´t k pxtk , xtk di bqItxi
tk “aufora‰bPV.
By the data-processing inequality, we upper bound the KL divergence betweenq0 andp T by the KL diver-
gence between the pathsqT´t 0,...,T´t N andp t0,...,tN. Next, we apply the Markovian property of the paths
along with Girsanov’s change-of-measure theorem to upper boundKLpq0}pT qby
KLpqT }p0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
« ÿ
yt:Qpyt,xtqą0
sT´t pyt, xtq
ˆD
ˆ eT´t k ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´t k pyt, xtq, sT´t pyt, xtq
˙
dt
ff
.
The first term is the initialization error and is controlled by choosing the time horizonT“Ωplogd`
log logpε´1Sqq. For the second term, we apply the law of cosines for Bregman divergence and obtain (with
ℓ :“t k andy ℓ :“x ℓ di c, wherey t “x t di c):
sT´t pyt, xtqD
ˆ eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´ℓ pyt, xtq, sT´t pyt, xtq
˙
“ eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 sT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqDppsT´ℓ pyℓ, xtq, sT´t pyt, xtqq
looooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
Controlled by Assumption 1
` psT´t pyℓ, xℓq ´s T´t pyt, xtqqlog psT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓq
sT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqlooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
Expectation controlled by Lemma 14
`s T´t pyt, xtqDps T´t pyℓ, xℓq, sT´t pyt, xtqq.
Similar to the proof of the uniform discrete diffusion model, the first term can be controlled by Assumption 1
after taking the expectation overxtk „
Ð
q tk and integrating over time, and the second term can be proved
to be zero by the martingale property from Lemma 14. Finally, using Dynkin’s formula, we relate the third
term to the effective total correlationDpq0q.
Next, we derive iteration complexity guarantees for our algorithm under specific choices of step size
schedules. The proof is given in Appendix D.2.
Corollary 2.Consider the setting in Theorem 3. LetT“logpdlogpSqq. For a fixedεą0, the distribution
poutput satisfiesKLpq data }p outputq Àε score `ε,
•under the constant step size schedule,tk ´t k´1 “T{Nfor allkP rNs, provided
N“ rO
ˆ Bpqdataq
ε
˙
;
14

[PDF page 15]
•under the exponential-then-constant step size schedule, whent k`1 ´t k ďκminp1, T´t k`1qforkP
t0, . . . , N´2u,T´t N´1 “ε{pdlogpSqq, andκ“N ´1pT`logpε ´1dlogpSqqq, provided
N“ rO
ˆ Dpqdataq
ε
˙
ď rO
ˆmintBpqdataq,Cpq dataqu
ε
˙
.
In words, Corollary 2 shows that the sampling complexity of Algorithm 1 required to obtain anε-accurate
distribution is governed by intrinsic complexity measures of the target distribution. Under the constant step
size schedule, the iteration complexity is controlled by the dual total correlation of the target distribution,
whereas under the exponential-then-constant schedule, the effective total correlation becomes the relevant
quantity. For illustration, let us consider the following two simple examples.
•Consider first the uniform distribution onrSsd. In this case, both complexity measures scale indepen-
dently of the ambient dimensiond, which means
N“ rO
´1
ε
¯
,(21)
reflecting the fact that it is exceptionally easy to sample from uniform distributions. While intuitive
in hindsight, this phenomenon has not been previously formalized in the literature.
•As a second example, consider a mixture of two Dirac measures, 1
2 δk1 ` 1
2 δk2. A direct calculation
shows that the dual total correlation remains independent ofd, which means
N“ rO
´1
ε
¯
,(22)
indicating that such distributions are also handled automatically by our algorithm.
To further illustrate the implications of Theorem 3, we consider some representative distributions for
which one or more of the quantitiesBpqdataq,Cpq dataq, orDpq dataqare small. Since the iteration complexity
scales linearly with these quantities, our result shows that discrete diffusion models can provably achieve
efficient sampling. Appendix A develops these examples in detail and provides rigorous proofs of the stated
claims.
•Hidden Markov models.Here, the observed variables correspond to words or tokens in a sentence,
while the hidden states encode latent semantic topics. Under the natural assumption that topics evolve
slowly, we show thatBpqdataqgrows sublinearly with the sequence length.
•Low-dimensional structures.Motivated by image generation, when the discrete data arise from the
quantization of a continuous distribution with intrinsic dimensionk, the dual total correlationBpqdataq
scales linearly withkrather than with the ambient dimensiond.
•Random graph models.Such models define distributions overd“
`n
2
˘
binary variables corre-
sponding to the edges of a graph withnvertices. Besides Erdős-Rényi random graphs, which have
independent edges and are therefore easy to sample, we consider both sparse random regular graphs
and stochastic block models. In these cases,Bpqdataqgrows at most linearly (up to logarithmic factors)
withn, rather than quadratically.
•Structure-with-noise distributions.Finally, we present an example in which both the total corre-
lationCpq dataqand the dual total correlationBpqdataqare of orderd, while the effective total correlation
Dpqdataqremains of constant order. Such distributions are motivated by applications such as error-
correcting codes and DNA sequences, where substantial noise may be present, yet the underlying signal
is highly structured.
15

[PDF page 16]
4 Discussion
In this work, we establish novel theoretical results for both uniform and masking discrete diffusions. For
uniform diffusion models, we show that theτ-leaping algorithm requiresrOpd{εqiterations to achieveεaccu-
racy in KL divergence, improving on the prior boundrO
`
d2S{ε
˘
. We further establish the first algorithmic
lower bound for theτ-leaping sampler, which shows that our upper bound is unimprovable for a large class
of distributions. For the masking discrete diffusion, we derive an upper bound that captures the intrinsic
complexity of the data distribution and can scale logarithmically with the ambient dimension. Importantly,
our results for both models only require a small score estimation error and, in contrast to prior work, do not
rely on early stopping or the boundedness assumptions of the score estimator.
The improved bound for the masking noising process is achieved via a modification of theτ-leaping
algorithm. This modification falls within a structured subclass ofτ-leaping strategies that (i) allow for
parallel coordinate updates, and thus sublinear rates, and (ii) preserve CTMC dynamics, which facilitates
theoretical analysis. We hope that this perspective motivates the development of adaptive samplers for
uniform discrete diffusion as well in the future.
Several other open questions remain. Understanding which noising mechanisms — masking, uniform,
or others — are best suited to different classes of target distributions is an important direction for future
work. Moreover, the problem of learning accurate score functions in discrete diffusion models remains largely
unexplored and warrants further investigation.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported in part by the NSF grants CCF-2106778, CCF-2418156 and CAREER award DMS-
2143215.
References
Austin, J., Johnson, D. D., Ho, J., Tarlow, D., and van den Berg, R. (2021). Structured denoising diffusion
models in discrete state-spaces.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:17981–17993.
Austin, T. (2020). Multi-variate correlation and mixtures of product measures.Kybernetika, pages 459–499.
Bach, F. and Saremi, S. (2025). Sampling binary data by denoising through score functions.arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.00557.
Benton, J., Shi, Y., De Bortoli, V., Deligiannidis, G., and Doucet, A. (2024). From denoising diffusions
to denoising markov models.Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series B: Statistical Methodology,
86(2):286–301.
Campbell, A., Benton, J., De Bortoli, V., Rainforth, T., Deligiannidis, G., and Doucet, A. (2022). A
continuous time framework for discrete denoising models.Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 35:28266–28279.
Chen, H., Lee, H., and Lu, J. (2023a). Improved analysis of score-based generative modeling: User-friendly
bounds under minimal smoothness assumptions. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages
4735–4763. PMLR.
Chen, H. and Ying, L. (2025). Convergence analysis of discrete diffusion model: exact implementation
through uniformization.Journal of Machine Learning, 4(2):108–127.
Chen, S., Chewi, S., Li, J., Li, Y., Salim, A., and Zhang, A. (2023b). Sampling is as easy as learning the score:
theory for diffusion models with minimal data assumptions. InThe Eleventh International Conference on
Learning Representations.
Chen, S., Cong, K., and Li, J. (2025). Optimal inference schedules for masked diffusion models.arXiv
preprint arXiv:2511.04647.
16

[PDF page 17]
Conforti, G., Durmus, A., and Pham, L.-T.-N. (2025). Non-asymptotic convergence of discrete diffusion
models: Masked and random walk dynamics.arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.00580.
Cover, T. M. (1999).Elements of information theory. John Wiley & Sons.
Dhariwal, P. and Nichol, A. (2021). Diffusion models beat GANs on image synthesis.Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 34:8780–8794.
Feinberg, E. A., Mandava, M., and Shiryaev, A. N. (2014). On solutions of kolmogorov’s equations for
nonhomogeneous jump markov processes.Journal of Mathematical Analysis and Applications, 411(1):261–
270.
Feller, W. (1940). On the integro-differential equations of purely discontinuous markoff processes.Transac-
tions of the American Mathematical Society, 48(3):488–515.
Gales, M. and Young, S. (2024). The application of hidden markov models in speech recognition.Foundations
and Trends®in Signal Processing, 1(3):195–304.
Gillespie, D. T. (1976). A general method for numerically simulating the stochastic time evolution of coupled
chemical reactions.Journal of computational physics, 22(4):403–434.
Gillespie, D. T. (2001). Approximate accelerated stochastic simulation of chemically reacting systems.The
Journal of chemical physics, 115(4):1716–1733.
Gorban, A. N. and Tyukin, I. Y. (2018). Blessing of dimensionality: mathematical foundations of the
statistical physics of data.Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and
Engineering Sciences, 376(2118):20170237.
Ho, J., Jain, A., and Abbeel, P. (2020). Denoising diffusion probabilistic models.Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 33:6840–6851.
Ho, J., Salimans, T., Gritsenko, A., Chan, W., Norouzi, M., and Fleet, D. J. (2022). Video diffusion models.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:8633–8646.
Huang, Z., Wei, Y., and Chen, Y. (2024). Denoising diffusion probabilistic models are optimally adaptive to
unknown low dimensionality.arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.18784.
Ingraham, J., Garg, V., Barzilay, R., and Jaakkola, T. (2019). Generative models for graph-based protein
design.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32.
Li, G. and Cai, C. (2025). Breaking AR’s sampling bottleneck: Provable acceleration via diffusion language
models.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 38.
Li, G., Cai, C., and Wei, Y. (2025). Dimension-free convergence of diffusion models for approximate gaussian
mixtures.arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05300.
Li, G., Wei, Y., Chen, Y., and Chi, Y. (2023). Towards faster non-asymptotic convergence for diffusion-based
generative models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09251.
Li, G. and Yan, Y. (2024). Adapting to unknown low-dimensional structures in score-based diffusion models.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 37:126297–126331.
Li, L., Carver, R., Lopez-Gomez, I., Sha, F., and Anderson, J. (2024). Generative emulation of weather
forecast ensembles with diffusion models.Science Advances, 10(13).
Liang, J., Huang, Z., and Chen, Y. (2025a). Low-dimensional adaptation of diffusion models: Convergence
in total variation.arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12982.
Liang, Y., Huang, R., Lai, L., Shroff, N., and Liang, Y. (2025b). Absorb and converge: Provable convergence
guarantee for absorbing discrete diffusion models.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
39.
17

[PDF page 18]
Liang, Y., Liang, Y., Lai, L., and Shroff, N. (2025c). Discrete diffusion models: Novel analysis and new
sampler guarantees.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 39.
Liebenau, A. and Wormald, N. (2024). Asymptotic enumeration of graphs by degree sequence, and the
degree sequence of a random graph.Journal of the European Mathematical Society, 26:1–40.
Lou, A., Meng, C., and Ermon, S. (2024). Discrete diffusion modeling by estimating the ratios of the data
distribution. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 4735–4763. PMLR.
Makur, A. and Polyanskiy, Y. (2018). Comparison of channels: Criteria for domination by a symmetric
channel.IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 64(8):5704–5725.
Meng, C., Choi, K., Song, J., and Ermon, S. (2022). Concrete score matching: Generalized score matching
for discrete data.Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:34532–34545.
Mor, B., Garhwal, S., and Kumar, A. (2021). A systematic review of hidden markov models and their
applications.Archives of computational methods in engineering, 28(3).
Ou, J., Nie, S., Xue, K., Zhu, F., Sun, J., Li, Z., and Li, C. (2025). Your absorbing discrete diffusion
secretly models the conditional distributions of clean data. InThe Thirteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations.
Park, Y.-H., Lai, C.-H., Hayakawa, S., Takida, Y., and Mitsufuji, Y. (2025). Jump your steps: Optimizing
sampling schedule of discrete diffusion models. InThe Thirteenth International Conference on Learning
Representations.
Pham, L.-T.-N., Shariatian, D., Ocello, A., Conforti, G., and Durmus, A. O. (2025). Discrete markov
probabilistic models: An improved discrete score-based framework with sharp convergence bounds under
minimal assumptions. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning.
Pope, P., Zhu, C., Abdelkader, A., Goldblum, M., and Goldstein, T. (2021). The intrinsic dimension of
images and its impact on learning. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations.
Ren, Y., Chen, H., Rotskoff, G. M., and Ying, L. (2025). How discrete and continuous diffusion meet:
Comprehensive analysis of discrete diffusion models via a stochastic integral framework. InInternational
Conference on Learning Representations.
Sahoo, S., Arriola, M., Schiff, Y., Gokaslan, A., Marroquin, E., Chiu, J., Rush, A., and Kuleshov, V.
(2024). Simple and effective masked diffusion language models.Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 37:130136–130184.
Sohl-Dickstein, J., Weiss, E., Maheswaranathan, N., and Ganguli, S. (2015). Deep unsupervised learning
using nonequilibrium thermodynamics. InInternational Conference on Machine Learning, pages 2256–
2265.
Song, Y. and Ermon, S. (2019). Generative modeling by estimating gradients of the data distribution.
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 32.
Van Dijk, N. M. (1992). Uniformization for nonhomogeneous markov chains.Operations research letters,
12(5):283–291.
von Rütte, D., Fluri, J., Pooladzandi, O., Schölkopf, B., Hofmann, T., and Orvieto, A. (2025). Scaling
behavior of discrete diffusion language models.arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.10858.
Watson, J. L., Juergens, D., Bennett, N. R., Trippe, B. L., Yim, J., Eisenach, H. E., Ahern, W., Borst,
A. J., Ragotte, R. J., Milles, L. F., et al. (2023). De novo design of protein structure and function with
rfdiffusion.Nature, 620(7976):1089–1100.
Xu, M., Yu, L., Song, Y., Shi, C., Ermon, S., and Tang, J. (2022). Geodiff: A geometric diffusion model for
molecular conformation generation. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations.
18

[PDF page 19]
Zeni, C., Pinsler, R., Zügner, D., Fowler, A., Horton, M., Fu, X., Wang, Z., Shysheya, A., Crabbé, J., Ueda,
S., et al. (2025). A generative model for inorganic materials design.Nature, 639(8055):624–632.
Zhang, Z., Chen, Z., andGu, Q.(2025). Convergenceofscore-baseddiscretediffusionmodels: Adiscrete-time
analysis. InInternational Conference on Learning Representations.
A Examples of low intrinsic dimensions
A.1 Details and formal results
In this section, we revisit the examples outlined in Section 3.2.2 and develop them in full detail. We formalize
the statements in this section, and provide rigorous proofs in Appendix A.2.
Hidden Markov models.A hidden Markov model (HMM) consists of a latent Markov chain whose states
are observed only indirectly through noisy measurements. Such models are widely used in natural language
processing and pattern recognition (Gales and Young, 2024; Mor et al., 2021). In language modeling, for
instance, the hidden stateszi may encode the semantic topic or grammatical structure of thei-th token or
word, while the observed variablesxi represent the realized words or tokens.
Formally, lettziuiPrds be a discrete-state Markov chain supported onZ, and lettxiuiPrds be observations
generated according to
xi “f ipzi, εiq,
wheretε iuiPrds are i.i.d. noise variables independent ofziiPrds. Whenz i represents the semantic topic of the
i-th paragraph in a document, it is natural to assume that topic transitions happen only infrequently; that
is,z i “z i´1 with high probability forią1. Under this model, we establish the following proposition, whose
proof is deferred to Section A.2.1.
Proposition 1.Consider the HMM described above. Suppose the transition probability oftziuiPrds satisfies
Prpzi ‰z i´1q ďpfor alliP t2, . . . , du. Assume that1{dÀp!1. Then
Bpqdataq ďpdlog
ˆ |Z|
p
˙
.(23)
To develop some intuition, consider generating a document with a constant number of paragraphs, where
the transition probability scalesp“Θp1{dq. Suppose further that the latent spaceZP rSs k for somek!d
andSdenotes the vocabulary size. Then, the above bound yields
Bpqdataq ÀklogpSdq,
which is substantially smaller than the ambient dimensiondlogpSq. As such, with Theorem 3, the sampling
complexity scales with the intrinsic topic dimensionkrather than the document lengthd.
Low-dimensional Structures.In image generation and other structured data settings, it is commonly
assumed that the data lie on or near a low-dimensional manifold embedded in a high-dimensional ambient
space, which often refers to as the manifold hypothesis (Gorban and Tyukin, 2018; Pope et al., 2021).
For example, natural images may be viewed as points on a manifold parameterized by a small number of
underlying factors, such as lighting conditions, pose, and object identity.
In discrete settings, the notion of a manifold is not mathematically well defined. To capture low-
dimensional structure, we instead model the data as arising from a continuous mapping from a latent
representation into a high-dimensional observation space. For some latent continuous random variablez
supported onZĂR k, consider a decoding proceduref:r0,1s k ÑR d as
xcon “fpzq `ε noise,
for additive perturbationsε noise.Thus, data lies close to a manifoldtfpzq:zPZu. The final discrete
observation is obtained via a quantization operatorQS, i.e.,x“Q Spxconq „q data.
19

[PDF page 20]
To align the model with standard image processing pipelines, we work with the uniform lattice quan-
tization functionQ S :R d Ñ rSs d defined coordinate-wise asrQ Spxqsi “clipptx iu,0, SqforiP rds, where
clippx, a, bq :“mintmaxtx, au, buis the clip function andt¨uis the floor function. To ensure regularity of
both the manifold and the induced data distribution, we focus on the case whereZis a compact set and
fis a Lipschitz function. The noiseε noise is taken to be Gaussian for simplicity of analysis; the arguments
extend readily to more general smooth noise distributions.
Proposition 2.LetZĂR k be compact with diameterD, and letf:ZÑR d beL-Lipschitz. Assume
the noise satisfiesε noise „Np0, σ 2Idqindependenly generated for each obersvation. Then the resulting
distribution satisfies
Bpqdataq ďklog
ˆ
2` 2DL
σ
˙
.(24)
In image generation, the “ideal image”xcon may be interpreted as the vector of continuous pixel intensities
prior to quantization, while the observed imagexis obtained by applying pixel-wise quantization toxcon.
Whenk!d, the above bound yields
Bpqdataq “ rOpkq “opdq,
and hence we can efficiently sample such images despite the high dimensionality of the observation space.
Random graph models.Discrete diffusion models have also found applications in scientific domains such
as molecular generation and protein design, where data are naturally represented as random graphs with fixed
vertex sets and random edges (Ingraham et al., 2019; Xu et al., 2022). To make this concrete, we consider
two widely studied random graph models onnvertices, which can be viewed as a discrete distribution over
adjacency matrices of dimensionn2.
•Regular graphs: Ak-regular graph is a graph in which each vertex has degree exactlyk. Suppose
we want to sample a random graphGfrom some distribution supported on the set ofk-regular graphs
withnvertices.
Proposition 3.For sparse regular graph model, i.e.,kďn{logpnq, we have
BpGq Àknlog
´ n
k
¯
“opn 2q.(25)
•Stochastic block models: A stochastic block model (SBM) is a generative model for random graphs
that captures community structure within networks. In an SBM,nvertices of the graph are partitioned
intordistinct communities or blocks, represented by latent variablestz iuiPrns taking values inrrs.
Conditioned on the latent labels, edges are generated independently. For two verticesi, jP rns, an
edge is created with probability
pItzi “z ju `qItz i ‰z ju,
wherep, qP r0,1sgovern the within- and between-community connection probabilities, respectively.
Proposition 4.LetGbe a random graph drawn from the abover-block SBM. Then
BpGq ďnlogprq “opn 2q.
Forbothrandomgraphmodels, asthenumberofverticesngrowslarge, thecomplexitysatisfiesBpGq “opn 2q,
which is strictly smaller compared to the ambient dimensionn2.This indicates that diffusion-based methods
can sample efficiently from such graph distributions.
In fact, the analyses of Propositions 2 and 4 extend naturally to generalized random geometric graphs.
Consider the following example. Let each vertexiP rnsbe associated with latent variablez i PZ. For
distinct verticesiandj, an edge is placed independently with probability
βexp
ˆ
´ dpzi, zjq
r0
˙
,
whereβP r0,1s, r 0 ą0anddp¨,¨qis an appropriate metric in the latent spaceZ.
20

[PDF page 21]
•When latent variablestz iuare discrete withopnqentropy, as is the case, for example, when it takes
value in a fixed-dimensional latent space, the dual total correlation of the resulting random graph is
opn2q.
•For continuous latent variables, supposeZ“S dz´1, the unit sphere inRdz. Under some regularity
conditions, the dual total correlation scales withd z ¨n, followed by an analogous covering number
argument in Proposition 2. In particular, wheneverdz “opnq, the complexity is again subquadratic,
leading to sublinear (inn2) convergence rates for diffusion-based sampling.
Structure-with-noise distributionsA prototypical example of a distribution with small dual total cor-
relationBpq 0qand large total correlationCpq 0qis the mixture of two Dirac measures:
pm :“ 1
2 δ0 ` 1
2 δ1,
where0and1are vectors of all-zeros and all-ones, respectively. It can be easily computed thatBpp mq “
logp2q, whereas,Cpp mq “ pd´1qlogp2q.
The opposite happens, for instance, for the followingXORdistributionpXOR:
x1, . . . , xd´1 i.i.d.„Bernp1{2qandx d “
d´1ÿ
i“1
xi mod 2.
In this case,BppXORq “ pd´1qlogp2q, andCpp XORq “logp2q.
Real-world data distributions can combine features of both extremes: a strong low-dimensional signal
corrupted by weakly correlated noise. In such cases, bothBpqdataqandCpq dataqcan be large, whileDpq dataq
remains small. To illustrate this phenomenon, consider the following entrywise mixture of the two preceding
examples.
1. Fix a bi-partitionrds “I 0 \I 1 for non-empty index setsI0 andI 1;
2. For all indicesiPI 0, setx i “bforb„Bernp1{2q;
3. Among all indicesiPI 1, sample all but onexi „Bernp1{2qindependently;
4. For the last indexi˚, setx i˚ “
`
b` ř
i‰i˚ xi
˘
mod 2.
Denote this distribution aspex, and letx“ px 1, . . . , xdq „p ex.
Proposition 5.Suppose thatmint|I 0|,|I 1|u{d“Θp1q. Distributionp ex satisfies
Bppexq “Θpdq,Cpp exq “ΘpdqandDpp exq “Op1q.(26)
By Proposition 5,pex, which can be viewed as a non-trivial mixing ofpm andp XOR, satisfies
Dppexq !mintBpp exq,Cpp exqu.
This example highlights the fundamental role of the effective total correlation in characterizing sampling
efficiency.
A.2 Proofs of results in Section A.1
Variants of the following lemma will be used repeatedly throughout this section. We state it here for
convenience and to streamline the proofs.
Lemma 1.Consider anyd-dimensional discrete random variableXand any random variableWsuch that
X i K KX´i |Wfor anyiP rds, whereX“ pX 1, . . . , XdqandX ´i is thepd´1q-dimensional marginal ofX
withi-th coordinate excluded. Then,
BpXq ďIpX;Wq.
IfWis discrete, we additionally haveBpXq ďHpWq.
21

[PDF page 22]
Proof of Lemma 1.We first notice that for any random variableWsuch thatX i K KX´i |Wfor any
iP rds, we have
HpX i |X ´iq ěHpX i |X ´i, Wq “HpX i |Wq,
where the first inequality is from the definition of the entropy. Recalling the definition ofBp¨q, we obtain
BpXq “HpXq ´
dÿ
i“1
HpX i|X ´iq ďHpXq ´
dÿ
i“1
HpX i |Wq.
Using the conditional independence condition again, we have
HpX|Wq “H
`
pX1, . . . , Xdq|W
˘
“
dÿ
i“1
HpX i |Wq,
which implies
BpXq ďHpXq ´HpX|Wq “IpX;Wq
paq
“HpWq ´HpW|Xq
pbq
ďHpWq,
where (a) and (b) apply whenWis a discrete random variable.
A.2.1 Proof of Proposition 1
For the hidden Markov structure oftpxi, ziquiPrds, it satisfiesx i K Kxj | pz i, zjq, sinceε i K Kεj | pz i, zjq.
Considering Lemma 1 above, we can upper boundBpq dataqbyHpzq, which is the entropy of the latent
Markov chain. By the additivity of the entropy, we have
Bpqdataq ďHpzq “Hpz 1q `
dÿ
i“2
H
`
zi|tzjujPri´1s
˘
“Hpz 1q `
dÿ
i“2
Hpzi|zi´1q.
Whentz iuiPrds is supported on a single point, we have|Z| “1andHpzq “0. When the state spaceZ
satisfies2ď |Z| ă 8, the maximum entropy distribution is achieved when
z1 „UnifpZqandz i|zi´1 „ p1´pqδ zi´1 `pUnif
`
Zz tz i´1u
˘
.
We obtain
Hpzq ďlogp|Z|q `
dÿ
i“2
„
´p1´pqlogp1´pq ` ´p|Z| ´1q ¨ p
|Z| ´1 log
ˆ p
|Z| ´1
˙ȷ
paq
ďlogp|Z|q ` pd´1q ¨
ˆ
2p`plog
ˆ |Z|
p
˙˙
pbq
ďpdlog
ˆ |Z|
p
˙
,
where in (a), we use´logp1´pq ď2p, sincep!1; in (b), we use the conditionpÁ1{dand|Z|{pě2{p"1.
This completes the proof of the desired result.
A.2.2 Proof of Proposition 2
Writeε noise “ pε1
noise, . . . , εd
noiseq. Sinceε noise „Np0, σ 2Idq, we haveεi
noise K Kε´i
noise for anyiP rds. Processing
through the decoderf,rx consi “ rfpzqs i `ε i
noise for anyiP rds, which leads to
rxconsi K K rxconsp´iq |z,(27)
whererx consp´iq is thepd´1q-dimensional marginal ofx con withi-th coordinate excluded. Note thatQ S
is a entry-wise quantization, i.e., we can writeQSpxq “ p rQSpx1q, . . . , rQSpxdqqfor entry-wise deterministic
22

[PDF page 23]
quantization function rQS :RÑ rSs, andx i “ rQSprxconsiqby the generation process. Eqn. (27) therefore
implies that for anyiP rds,
xi K Kx´i |z.
Applying Lemma 1, we obtain
Bpqdataq “Bpxq ďIpx;zq ďIpx con;zq,(28)
where the last inequality follows from the data processing inequality of the mutual information.
In the following proof, we proceed to controlIpxcon;zq. Sinceε noise is independent noise, using data-
processing inequality, we reach
Ipxcon;zq ďI
`
fpzq `ε noise;fpzq
˘
“I
`
fpzq;fpzq `ε noise
˘
.(29)
Without loss of generality, we assumeZĎ r0,Ds k. Partitionr0,Ds k into hypercubes of sizehJ “σ{L, and
write this partition astC1, . . . , CrD{hJ sk usuch that
r0,Ds k Ď
rD{hJ sk
ğ
i“1
Ci.
DefineJ“Jpzqto be the hypercube indexipzqsuch thatzPC ipzq, andF J to beσ-algebra generated by
Jpzq. By the chain rule and data processing inequality for mutual information, we have
I
`
fpzq;fpzq `ε noise
˘
ďI
`
Jpzq, fpzq;fpzq `ε noise
˘
“I
`
Jpzq;fpzq `ε noise
˘
`I
`
fpzq;fpzq `ε noise |J
˘
ďklog
ˆ
1` D
hJ
˙
`I
`
fpzq;fpzq `ε noise |J
˘
,(30)
where in the last line, we useIpJpzq;fpzq`εnoiseq ďHpJpzqq ďlogp|supppJpzqq|q. To upper bound the second
term above, we introduce the following lemma on Gaussian channel, whose proof is given in Section F.1.
Lemma 2.For any random variableWPR d and independent noiseεnoise „Np0, σ 2Idq, we have
IpW;W`ε noiseq ď Tr
`
VarrWs
˘
2σ2 ,
whereTrp¨qis the trace function.
In Lemma 2, takingW d“fpzq |F J, we arrive at
I
`
fpzq;fpzq `ε noise |J
˘
ď
Tr
´
Var
“
fpzq |F J
‰¯
2σ2 .(31)
To further control the right hand side, direct calculations show
Tr
´
Var
“
fpzq |F J
‰¯
“
dÿ
i“1
Var
“
rfpzqs i ˇˇ FJ
‰
“E
„›››fpzq ´E
“
fpzq |F J
‰›››
2
2
ˇˇˇ FJ
ȷ
.(32)
It is therefore sufficient to consider the quantity}fpzq ´Erfpzq |FJ s}2
2.We make the observation that
›››fpzq ´E
“
fpzq |F J
‰›››
2
paq
ďsup
wPConvpfpC Jpzq qq
››fpzq ´w
››
2
pbq
“sup
wPfpC Jpzq q
››fpzq ´w
››
2
23

[PDF page 24]
pcq
ď }f} Lip ¨sup
z1PCJpzq
››z´z 1››
2
pdq
ďL
?
khJ ,
where} ¨ } 2 denotes Euclidean norm inRd, andConvp¨qdenotes the convex null of a given set. In (a), we
use the fact thatErfpzq |F J s PConvpfpC Jpzq qq; in (b), we adoptfis continuous and hencefpC Jpzq qqis
bounded, and the property of the convex hull that
diam
`
ConvpAq
˘
“diampAqfor any bounded subsetAĎR d;
in (c), we recall the Lipschitz condition onf; in (d), we notice thatdiampCiq ď
?
khJ for any hypercubeCi.
Putting pieces together gives
Tr
´
Var
“
fpzq |F J
‰¯
ď
`
L
?
khJ
˘2
“kσ 2.(33)
Finally, plugging Eqns. (31) and (33) into Eqn. (30), we obtain
I
`
fpzq;fpzq `ε noise
˘
ďklog
ˆ
1` DL
σ
˙
` k
2 ďklog
ˆ
2` 2DL
σ
˙
.
Combining the above inequality with Eqns. (28) and (29), we conclude
Bpqdataq ďIpx con;zq “I
`
fpzq;fpzq `ε noise
˘
ďklog
ˆ
2` 2DL
σ
˙
.
A.2.3 Proof of Proposition 3
Define the set of allk-regular graphs withnvertices asGn,k. Without loss of generality, we assume thatnk
is even, as otherwiseGn,k is empty. By a corollary of Liebenau and Wormald (2024, Theorem 1.4), we have
the following asymptotic result:
|Gn,k| “Θ
˜ˆn´1
k
˙nˆ npn´1q
2
m
˙ˆnpn´1q
2m
˙´1¸
.
wherem“kn{2. By Stirling’s formula of the form
logpa!q “alogpaq ´a`Oplogpaqq,
we can compute that
logp|Gn,k|q Ànlog
ˆn´1
k
˙
`log
ˆ npn´1q
2
m
˙
´log
ˆnpn´1q
2m
˙
“ kn
2 log
ˆ n´1´k
k
˙
` npn´1q
2 log
ˆ n´1
n´1´k
˙
ď kn
2 log
´ n
k
¯
` n2
2 log
ˆ
1` k
n´1´k
˙
ď kn
2 log
´ n
k
¯
` kn2
2pn´1´kq Àknlog
´ n
k
¯
,
where in the last line, we invoke the condition thatkďn{logpnq !n´1´k. Recalling the definition of
Bp¨q, we can conclude
BpGq ďHpGq ďlogp|G n,k|q Àknlog
´ n
k
¯
“opn 2q.
24

[PDF page 25]
A.2.4 Proof of Proposition 4
By definition ofr-block SBM, the latent variable vectorpz1, . . . , znqis supported onrrs n, which satisfies
H
`
pz1, . . . , znq
˘
ďlog
`
|rrsn|
˘
“nlogprq.
Given the latent variablepz1, . . . , znq, the block structure is fixed and hence each edge is sampled indepen-
dently from a Bernoulli distribution. Therefore, we have
eij K Kekℓ | tz iuiPrns
for anyi, j, k, lP rns, wheree ij ande kℓ are the indicator variables of the existence of edges between vertices
i, jand between verticesk, ℓ. By Lemma 1, we conclude
BpGq ďHppz 1, . . . , znqq ďnlogprq ďnlogpnq “opn 2q,
where we use the convention that the number of blocks satisfiesrďn.
Remark2.The setting of Proposition 4 can be viewed as a special case of the generalized random geometric
graph model, in which the latent variable corresponds to the block index. More generally, the same conclusion
holds under analogous assumptions, with essentially the same proof strategy.
A.2.5 Proof of Proposition 5
Letr:“ |I 0|{dbe the proportion of coordinates inI0. Throughout, we assumemintr,1´ru “Θp1q.
Step 1: EstablishBpp exq “ΘpdqandCpp exq “Θpdq.For a random variablex„p ex, we shall demon-
strate that
dÿ
i“1
Hpxiq “dlogp2q,logp2qp|I 1| ´1q ďHpxq ďlogp2q|I 1|and
dÿ
i“1
Hpxi |x ´iq “0.(34)
Towards this goal, we make the observation that for anyiPI 0 orxPI 1zi˚,x i „Bernp1{2qand hence
Hpxiq “logp2q. Fori“i ˚, we assert thatxi˚
„Bernp1{2q. In fact, we have
P
¨
˝ ÿ
iPI1zi˚
xi ”0 mod 2
˛
‚“P
ˆ
Bin
ˆ
|I1| ´1, 1
2
˙
”0 mod 2
˙
“ 1
2 ,
where in the last equality, we invoke the following lemma.
Lemma 3.For anynPN ` andX„Binpn,1{2q, we have
PpX”0 mod 2q “PpX”1 mod 2q “ 1
2 .
As result, the distribution ofxi˚
satisfies
Ppxi˚
“0q “Ppb“0q ¨P
¨
˝ ÿ
iPI1zi˚
xi ”0 mod 2
˛
‚`Ppb“1q ¨P
¨
˝ ÿ
iPI1zi˚
xi ”1 mod 2
˛
‚“ 1
2 ,
which reveals thatxi˚
„Bernp1{2qand henceHpx i˚
q “logp2q. In conclusion, we obtain
dÿ
i“1
Hpxiq “
ÿ
iPrdszi˚
Hpxiq `Hpi ˚q “dlogp2q.(35)
25

[PDF page 26]
To upper boundHpxq, invoke the simple property for entropy function to get
Hpxq ďlogp|supppxq|q ďlog
´
2¨2 |I1|´1
¯
“logp2q|I 1|.(36)
The lower bound can be obtained through
Hpxq ěHptx iuiPI1zi˚q “log
´
2|I1|´1
¯
“logp2qp|I 1| ´1q.(37)
For anyiP rds, whenx ´i is given, we can recoverxi by first observing the value ofbfromxj for anyjPI 0,
then applying the formula
xi “b`
ÿ
kPI1zi
xkItiPI 1umod 2.
Thus,x i |x ´i is always a Dirac measure, which leads to
dÿ
i“1
Hpxi |x ´iq “0.(38)
Combining Eqns. (35), (36), (37) and (38) proves Eqn. (34).
Equipped with Eqn. (34), we are ready to boundBppexqandCpp exq. It can easily seen that
Bppexq “Hpxq ´
dÿ
i“1
Hpxi |x ´iq ělogp2q
`
p1´rqd´1
˘
“Ωpdq,
Cppexq “
dÿ
i“1
Hpxiq ´Hpxq ělogp2qpd´ |I 1|q “logp2qrd“Ωpdq.
For the reverse direction, we can prove the matching lower bound similarly, which leads to
Bppexq “Θpdq,Cpp exq “Θpdq.
Step 2: ShowDpp exq “Op1q.Recall the definition ofDp¨qin Eqn. (16):
Dppexq :“
ż 8
0
minp1, tqIptqdtwithIptq :“
ÿ
i‰jPrds
Ipxi
t;x j
t |x ´pi,jq
t q ě0.
To upper boundDppexq, let us write
Dppexq “
ż 1
d
0
tIptqdt`
ż logpdq
1{d
mint1, tuIptqdt`
ż 8
logpdq
Iptqdt.
By direct calculations, one has
ż 1
d
0
tIptqdtď 1
d
ż 1
d
0
Iptqdtď Bppexq
d “Θp1q,
ż 8
logpdq
Iptqdtď 1
d´1
ż 8
logpdq
pet ´1qIptqdtď Cppexq
d´1 “Θp1q.
Therefore, it obeys
Dppexq “
ż logpdq
1{d
mint1, tuIptqdt`Op1q.
26

[PDF page 27]
To proveDppexq “Op1q, it suffices to show that
ż logpdq
1{d
mint1, tuIptqdt“Op1q.(39)
In view of the definition ofIptq, we can decompose it as
Iptq “
˜ ÿ
i,jPI0,i‰j
`
ÿ
i,jPI1,i‰j
`
ÿ
iPI0,jPI1
`
ÿ
iPI1,jPI0
¸
Ipxi
t;x j
t |x ´pi,jq
t q
:“I 1ptq `I 2ptq `I 3ptq `I 4ptq,
and we shall bound these four terms separately.
Before diving into the proofs, we make the observation that the mutual information can be computed via
Ipxi
t;x j
t |x ´pi,jq
t q “Hpx i
t |x ´pi,jq
t q ´Hpx i
t |x ´i
t q.(40)
To further compute each entropy terms, let us introduce two quantities below
H1
t “Hpe ´tδ0 ` p1´e ´tqδMASKq “Hpe ´tδ1 ` p1´e ´tqδMASKq “te ´t ´logp1´e ´tqp1´e ´tq,(41a)
H2
t “H
ˆ1
2 e´tδ0 ` 1
2 e´tδ1 ` p1´e ´tqδMASK
˙
“ pt`logp2qqe ´t ´logp1´e ´tqp1´e ´tq.(41b)
We shall relate our quantities of interest to these terms below.
Case 1:i, jPI 0,i‰j.For any givenx ´pi,jq
t , it always holds true that
Ppxi
t “MASKq “1´e ´t,
since the noising process is time-homogeneous and independent between coordinates. Recall the definition
mpxq “ tiP rds:x i “MASKu. Define the eventE i,j
t,1 PF ´pi,jq
t , whereF ´pi,jq
t is theσ-algebra generated by
x´pi,jq
t , as follows:
E i,j
t,1 :“
#
x´pi,jq
t :
˜ ł
kPI0zti,ju
tkRmpx tqu
¸ ł ˜ľ
ℓPI1
tℓPmpx tqu
¸
“1
+
,
where^is the logical operator AND, and_is the logical operator OR. By construction ofp ex, it can be
checked that
´
xi
t
ˇˇ x´pi,jq
t PE i,j
t,1
¯
„e ´tδ0{1 ` p1´e ´tqδMASK;
´
xi
t
ˇˇ x´pi,jq
t P pE i,j
t,1qc
¯
„ 1
2 e´tδ0 ` 1
2 e´tδ1 ` p1´e ´tqδMASK,
whereδ 0{1 represents eitherδ 0 orδ 1. Therefore, by the definition of the conditional entropy, we have
Hpxi
t |x ´pi,jq
t q “H 1
t ¨PpE i,j
t,1q `H 2
t ¨
`
1´PpE i,j
t,1q
˘
.(42)
Define the eventEi
t,1 PF ´i
t , whereF ´i
t is theσ-algebra generated byx ´i
t , as follows:
E i
t,1 :“
#
x´i
t :
˜ ł
kPI0ztiu
tkRmpx tqu
¸ ł ˜ľ
ℓPI1
tℓPmpx tqu
¸
“1
+
.
Then, it can be checked similarly that
`
xi
t
ˇˇ x´i
t PE i
t,1
˘
„e ´tδ0{1 ` p1´e ´tqδMASK;
27

[PDF page 28]
`
xi
t
ˇˇ x´i
t P pE i
t,1qc˘
„ 1
2 e´tδ0 ` 1
2 e´tδ1 ` p1´e ´tqδMASK,
which leads to
Hpxi
t |x ´i
t q “H 1
t ¨PpE i
t,1q `H 2
t ¨
`
1´PpE i
t,1q
˘
.(43)
Plugging Eqns. (42) and (43) into Eqn. (40) gives that for anyi, jPI0,i‰j,
Ipxi
t;x j
t |x ´pi,jq
t q “Hpx i
t |x ´pi,jq
t q ´Hpx i
t |x ´i
t q
“H 1
t ¨PpE i,j
t,1q `H 2
t ¨
`
1´PpE i,j
t,1q
˘
´H 1
t ¨PpE i
t,1q ´H 2
t ¨
`
1´PpE i
t,1q
˘
“ pH2
t ´H 1
t q
`
PpE i
t,1q ´PpE i,j
t,1q
˘
“logp2qe ´2t `
1´e ´t˘|I0|´2 ´
1´e ´|I1|t
¯
“O
´
e´2tp1´e ´tqrd{2
¯
,
whose value is independent of the indicesiandj. Since|ti, jPI 0 :i‰ju| “rdprd´1q “Θpd 2q, quantity
I1ptqsatisfies
I1ptq “
ÿ
i,jPI0,i‰j
Ipxi
t;x j
t |x ´pi,jq
t q “O
´
d2e´2tp1´e ´tqrd{2
¯
.(44)
Case 2:i, jPI 1,i‰j.Following the proof strategy in Case 1, for any givenx ´pi,jq
t , it holds that
xi
t |x ´pi,jq
t „ 1
2 e´tδ0 ` 1
2 e´tδ1 ` p1´e ´tqδMASK,
which implies that
Hpxi
t |x ´pi,jq
t q “H 2
t .(45)
Define the eventEi
t,2 PF ´i
t as follows:
E i
t,2 :“
#
x´i
t :
˜ ł
kPI0
tkRmpx tqu
¸ ľ ˜ ľ
ℓPI1ztiu
tℓPmpx tqu
¸
“1
+
,
which induces
`
xi
t
ˇˇ x´i
t PE i
t,2
˘
„e ´tδ0{1 ` p1´e ´tqδMASK;
`
xi
t
ˇˇ x´i
t P pE i
t,2qc˘
„ 1
2 e´tδ0 ` 1
2 e´tδ1 ` p1´e ´tqδMASK,
and the conditional entropy formula
Hpxi
t |x ´i
t q “H 1
t ¨PpE i
t,2q `H 2
t ¨
`
1´PpE i
t,2q
˘
.(46)
Plugging Eqns. (45) and (46) into Eqn. (40) gives that for anyi, jPI0,i‰j,
Ipxi
t;x j
t |x ´pi,jq
t q “Hpx i
t |x ´pi,jq
t q ´Hpx i
t |x ´i
t q
“H 2
t ´H 1
t ¨PpE i
t,2q ´H 2
t ¨
`
1´PpE i
t,2q
˘
“
`
H2
t ´H 1
t
˘
PpE i
t,2q “O
´
e´p1´rqdt
¯
,
whose value is, again, independent of the indicesiandj. Since|ti, jPI 1 :i‰ju| “ p1´rqdpp1´rqd´1q “
Θpd2q, we reach
I2ptq “
ÿ
i,jPI1,i‰j
Ipxi
t;x j
t |x ´pi,jq
t q “Opd 2e´p1´rqdtq.(47)
28

[PDF page 29]
Case 3:iPI 0,jPI 1.Define the functionH Bppq :“ ´plogppq ´ p1´pqlogp1´pqto be the entropy of the
distributionBernppq. Following the proofs of the two cases above, let us define events
E i,j
t,3 :“
#
x´pi,jq
t :
˜ ł
kPI0ztiu
tk‰mpx tqu
¸ ł ˜ ľ
ℓPI1ztju
tℓPmpx tqu
¸
“1
+
;
E i
t,3 :“
#
x´i
t :
˜ ł
kPI0ztiu
tk‰mpx tqu
¸ ł ˜ľ
ℓPI1
tℓPmpx tqu
¸
“1
+
.
Similar calculations yield
Hpxi
t |x ´pi,jq
t q “H 1
t ¨PpE i,j
t,3q `H 2
t ¨
`
1´PpE i,j
t,3q
˘
;
Hpxi
t |x ´i
t q “H 1
t ¨PpE i
t,3q `H 2
t ¨
`
1´PpE i
t,3q
˘
.
Therefore, we obtain
Ipxi
t;x j
t |x ´pi,jq
t q “ pH 2
t ´H 1
t q
`
PpE i
t,3q ´PpE i,j
t,3q
˘
“logp2qe ´|I1|t `
1´e ´t˘|I0|
“O
´
e´HBprqd
¯
,
where the last equality is due to the fact thate´|I1|t p1´e ´tq|I0| is maximized att“ ´logp1´rq. Finally,
with|tiPI 0, jPI 1u| “rp1´rqd 2, we can bound
I3ptq “
ÿ
iPI0,jPI1
Ipx i
t;x j
t |x ´pi,jq
t q “O
´
d2e´HBprqd
¯
.(48)
Case 4:iPI 1,jPI 0.Notice thatI 3ptqandI 4ptqare invariant under swappingiandj. We can show in
the same way as above that
I4ptq “O
´
d2e´HBprqd
¯
.(49)
Putting everything together.Combining Eqns. (44), (47), (48) and (49), we arrive at
Iptq Àd 2
´
e´2tp1´e ´tqrd{2 `e ´p1´rqdt `e ´HBprqd
¯
.(50)
We are now in a position to prove Eqn. (39). Let us begin with the integration over the time interval
tP r1{d,1s. Direct calculation yields thate ´2tp1´e ´tqrd{2 is maximized att ˚ “logp1` rd
4 q ą1, which
reveals that
d2e´2tp1´e ´tqrd{2 ďd 2e´2t˚
“d 2
ˆ
1` rd
4
˙´2
“Op1q.(51)
For the term fromI2ptq, we obtain
ż 1
1
d
t¨d 2e´p1´rqdtdt
paq
“
ż d
1
se´p1´rqsdsď
ż 8
0
se´p1´rqsds“ 1
p1´rq 2 “Op1q,(52)
where in (a), we use the change of variable formula withs“dt. Similarly, we can show that
ż 1
1
d
t¨d 2e´HBprqddtď
ż 1
0
t¨d 2e´HBprqddt“ 1
2 d2e´HBprqd “Op1q,(53)
where the conditionmintr,1´ru “Θp1qensuresH Bprq “Θp1q. Taking collectively Eqns. (50), (51), (52)
and (53), we arrive at
ż 1
1
d
mint1, tuIptqdt“
ż 1
1
d
tIptqdt“Op1q.(54)
29

[PDF page 30]
Let us move on to the integration over time intervaltP r1,logpdqs. The integral computation yields that
ż logpdq
1
d2e´2tp1´e ´tqrd{2dt
paq
“
ż d{e
1
s
´
1´ s
d
¯rd{2
ds
pbq
ď
ż 8
0
se´rs{2ds“Op1q,(55)
where in (a), we use the change of variable formula withs“de ´t, and in (b), we use the inequality
p1´xq 1{x ďe ´1 forxP p0,1s. For the remaining terms, we have
ż logpdq
1
d2e´p1´rqdtdtď
ż logpdq
0
d2e´p1´rqddt“d 2 logpdqe´p1´rqd “Op1q;(56)
ż logpdq
1
d2e´HBprqddtďd 2 logpdqe´HBprqd “Op1q,(57)
where the conditionmintr,1´ru “Θp1qensuresH Bprq “Θp1q. Now, combining Eqns. (50), (55), (56) and
(57) yields
ż logpdq
1
mint1, tuIptqdt“
ż logpdq
1
Iptqdt“Op1q.(58)
Finally, equipped with Eqns. (54) and (58), we conclude
ż logpdq
1
d
mint1, tuIptqdt“
ż 1
1
d
mint1, tuIptqdt`
ż logpdq
1
mint1, tuIptqdt“Op1q,
which provesDppexq “Op1q.
B Technical preparations
B.1 Score functions
Below, we present an equivalent formulation of the score functions.
Proposition 6.Letq 0 be an initial distribution onX0. Letx, yPXbe such thatQpy, xq ą0. Then,
1. for the uniform noising process,
stpy, xq “ Ex0„q0 αdHpy,x0q
t
Ex0„q0 αdH px,x0q
t
,(59)
whereα t :“ 1´e´t
1`pS´1qe´t.
2. for the masking noising process,
stpy, xq “ 1
et ´1
q0pyq
q0pxq ,(60)
where forxPXzX 0,q 0pxqis the marginal probability of theunmaskedcoordinates ofxunderq 0.
Proof of Proposition 6.By the definition of the score function, one can write
stpy, xq “ qtpyq
qtpxq “
ř
x0
qt|0py|x 0qq0px0qř
x0 qt|0px|x 0qq0px0q .
For the uniform noising process, one can solve the Kolmogorov forward equation for every dimension. As a
result, the transition can be written as
qt|0py|x 0q “
ˆ1´e ´t
S
˙dHpy,x0q ˆ1` pS´1qe ´t
S
˙d´dHpy,x0q
“
ˆ1` pS´1qe ´t
S
˙d
αdHpy,x0q
t ,
30

[PDF page 31]
which proves Eqn. (59). More details of this relation can be found in (e.g., Zhang et al. (2025), Proposition
1).
For the masking noising process, for notational convenience, given anyxP prSs Y tMASKuqd, define
mpxq :“ tiP rds:x i “MASKu.(61)
In view of this piece of notation, asPrpxi
t “MASKq “e ´t, and coordinates evolve independently, one can
write
qt|0py|x 0q “ p1´e ´tq|mpyq|e´tpd´|mpyq|qItfor alliP rds, y i P tx i
0,MASKu u.
AsQpy, xq ą0, it must be thatd Hpx, yq “1, and fori, such thatx i ‰y i,x i “MASKandy i ‰MASK.
This implies that|mpxq|“|mpyq|`1, and we can write
ř
x0 qt|0py|x 0qq0px0qř
x0 qt|0px|x 0qq0px0q “ e´t
1´e ´t
ř
x0 q0px0qItfor alliP rds, y i P tx i
0,MASKu uř
x0 q0px0qItfor alliP rds, x i P tx i
0,MASKu u “ 1
et ´1
q0pyq
q0pxq .
B.2 Technical lemmas
Lemma 4(Chain rule of KL divergence).ForNą0, leta 0:N , b0:N be the joint distributions of two Markov
processes. Then,
KLpa0:N }b0:N q “KLpa 0}b0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
Ex„ak KL
`
ak`1|kp¨ |xq}b k`1|kp¨ |xq
˘
.
Proof of Lemma 4.Invoking the definition of KL divergence with some direct calculations yields
KLpa0:N }b0:N q “E x0:N „a0:N log a0:N px0:N q
b0:N px0:N q
“E x0:N „a0:N log
˜
a0px0q
b0px0q
N´1ź
k“0
ak`1|kpxk`1 |x kq
bk`1|kpxk`1 |x kq
¸
“E x0„a0 log a0px0q
b0px0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
Exk„ak Exk`1„ak`1|kp¨|xkq log ak`1|kpxk`1 |x kq
bk`1|kpxk`1 |x kq
“KLpa 0}b0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
Exk„ak KL
`
ak`1|kp¨ |x kq}bk`1|kp¨ |x kq
˘
.
Lemma 5(Derivative of KL: an upper bound).Letpq tqandpp tqbe the marginals of CTMCs with rate
matricespQ tqandp pQtq, respectively, and
Ð
q t ”q T´t be the marginals of the reverse process. Then, for any
tąt k and for anyz,
B
Bt KL
´Ð
q t|tk p¨ |zq}p t|tk p¨ |zq
¯
ďE xt„
Ð
q t|tk p¨|zq
ÿ
y‰xt
«
pQtpxt, yq ´
Ð
Qtpxt, yq `
Ð
Qtpxt, yqlog
Ð
Qtpxt, yq
pQtpxt, yq
ff
.
Proof of Lemma 5.Let us omit the conditioning onzfor the notation brevity. By direct calculations,
one can write
A :“ B
Bt KL
´Ð
q t|tk }pt|tk
¯
“
ÿ
xPX
ˆ B
Bt
Ð
q t|tk pxq
˙
log
Ð
q t|tk pxq
pt|tk pxq ´
ÿ
xPX
Ð
q t|tk pxq
B
Bt pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pxq .
31

[PDF page 32]
Recall the Kolmogorov equation:
B
Bt
Ð
q t|tk pxq “
ÿ
yPX
Ð
Qpy, xq
Ð
q t|tk pyqand B
Bt pt|tk pxq “
ÿ
yPX
pQpy, xqpt|tk pyq
Putting the above together, we obtain (relabelingxandy)
A“E x„
Ð
q t|tk
ÿ
yPX
«
Ð
Qpx, yqlog
˜ Ð
q t|tk pyq
pt|tk pyq
¸
´ pQpx, yq
Ð
q t|tk pyq
Ð
q t|tk pxq
¨ pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pyq
ff
“E x„
Ð
q t|tk
ÿ
y‰x
«
Ð
Qpx, yqlog
˜ Ð
q t|tk pyq
pt|tk pyq
¸
´
Ð
Qpx, yqlog
˜ Ð
q t|tk pxq
pt|tk pxq
¸
´ pQpx, yq
Ð
q t|tk pyq
Ð
q t|tk pxq
¨ pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pyq
ff
´ pQpx, xq
“E x„
Ð
q t|tk
ÿ
y‰x
«
Ð
Qpx, yqlog
˜ Ð
q t|tk pyq
Ð
q t|tk pxq
¨ pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pyq
¸
´ pQpx, yq
Ð
q t|tk pyq
Ð
q t|tk pxq
¨ pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pyq
ff
´ pQpx, xq
“E x„
Ð
q t|tk
ÿ
y‰x
«
Ð
Qpx, yqlog
˜ Ð
q t|tk pyq
Ð
q t|tk pxq
¨ pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pyq
¸
´ pQpx, yq
Ð
q t|tk pyq
Ð
q t|tk pxq
¨ pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pyq ` pQpx, yq
ff
,
(62)
where we invoke the the property that
Ð
Qtpx, xq “ ´ ř
y‰x
Ð
Qtpx, yqand pQtpx, xq “ ´ ř
y‰x pQtpx, yq.Then,
lettingC xy be such that (recall thatzis fixed)
Ð
q t|tk py|zq
Ð
q t|tk px|zq
“
Ð
Qtpx, yq
Cxy
,(63)
it satisfies that
A“E x„
Ð
q t|tk
ÿ
y‰x
«
pQpx, yq `
Ð
Qpx, yqlog
˜ Ð
Qtpx, yq
pQtpx, yq
¸
`
Ð
Qtpx, yqlog
˜ pQtpx, yq
Cxy
¨ pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pyq
¸
´ pQpx, yq
Ð
Qtpx, yq
Cxy
¨ pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pyq
ff (64)
Finally, sincelogzďz´1,
AďE x„
Ð
q t|tk
ÿ
y‰x
«
pQpx, yq `
Ð
Qpx, yqlog
˜ Ð
Qtpx, yq
pQtpx, yq
¸
´
Ð
Qpx, yq
`
Ð
Qtpx, yq
pQtpx, yq
Cxy
¨ pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pyq ´ pQpx, yq
Ð
Qtpx, yq
Cxy
¨ pt|tk pxq
pt|tk pyq
ff
“E x„
Ð
q t|tk
ÿ
y‰x
«
pQtpx, yq ´
Ð
Qtpx, yq `
Ð
Qtpx, yqlog
˜ Ð
Qtpx, yq
pQtpx, yq
¸ff
.
Lemma 6(Itô’s Lemma for Poisson jump process).For the Poisson jump processtxtutě0 with generator
tLtutě0 and rate matrixtRtutě0. Itô’s Lemma formula can be written as
fpt, x tq “fp0, x 0q `
ż t
0
“
Bsfps, x s´ q ` pLsfq ps, xs´ q
‰
dt`M t,(65)
wherex s´ “lim uÑs´ xs, which exists for almost everywheresP r0, tqunder the Lebesgue measure. The
compensation processtMuuuPrℓ,ts is defined as
Mu “
ÿ
ys:ys‰xs
ż u
ℓ
`
fps, y sq ´fps, x sq
˘`
dN xs,ys
s ´λ xs,ys
s ds
˘
,
32

[PDF page 33]
whereN x,y
s is the counting process of jumps fromxtoyup to timetandλ x,y
s is theF s´-intensity ofN x,y
s ,
i.e.,λ x,y
s “Itx s´ “yuR tpx, yq.
See (Conforti et al., 2025, Appendix A.5) for more details.
C Proofs of results in Section 3.1
C.1 Proof of Theorem 1
We first decompose the KL divergence between the output distributionpT and the target distributionq0 as
KLpq0}pT q ďKLpq T´t 0,...,T´t N }pt0,...,tN q
“KLpq T }p0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
Extk „
Ð
q tk
”
KL
´Ð
q tk`1|tk p¨|xtk q}ptk`1|tk p¨|xtk q
¯ı
,(66)
where the first inequality follows from the data-processing inequality for KL divergence and the second
inequality follows from the chain rule for KL divergence in Lemma 4. The first term is the initialization
error, which can be upper bounded by the following lemma.
Lemma 7.For the uniform noising process, for any initial distributionq0 PPpXq, time indextě0, one
has the same limit distribution
qt
dÑp 0 “UnifpXq,astÑ 8.
Further, the modified log-Sobolev constant3 ofq t satisfiesC LSI “2, which leads to
KLpqt}p0q ďe ´tKLpq0}p0q ďe ´tdlogpSq.
The proof of Lemma 7 can be found in previous works, e.g., Zhang et al. (2025, Proposition 2). Applying
the lemma above together with Lemma 5 and Eqn. (7) on the second term in Eqn. (66), we obtain
KLpp0}qT q
ďKLpq T }p0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
Extk „
Ð
q tk
„ż tk`1
tk
B
Bt KL
´Ð
q t|tk p¨|xtk q}pt|tk p¨|xtk q
¯
dt
ȷ
ďe ´T dlogpSq
`
N´1ÿ
k“0
Extk „
Ð
q tk
ż tk`1
tk
Ext„
Ð
q t|tk
ÿ
y‰xt
«
pQtpxt, yq ´
Ð
Qtpxt, yq `
Ð
Qtpxt, yqlog
Ð
Qtpxt, yq
pQtpxt, yq
ff
dt
ďe ´T dlogpSq ` 1
S
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
„ ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
D
`
psT´t k pxtk ‘i c, xtk q, sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
˘
dt
ȷ
.(67)
In the following, we focus on the quantity
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtqD
`
psT´t k pxtk ‘i c, xtk q, sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
˘
.(68)
For simplicity, we writetk :“ℓ. Direct calculations yield the following decomposition
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtqD
`
psT´t k pxtk ‘i c, xtk q, sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
˘
3CLSI is defined as the smallest number such that for anyqPPpXq,KLpq|UnifpXqq ďC LSI{2¨Epq,logpqqq, whereEis the
Dirichlet form associated with the uniform noising process, i.e.,Epf, gq “ ´p2|X|q´1 ř
x,yPX pfpxq ´fpyqqpgpxq ´gpyqqQpx, yq.
33

[PDF page 34]
“
ÿ
yℓ:dHpyℓ,xℓq“1
sT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqDp psT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓq, sT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqq
lo oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo omo oooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooo on
T t,ℓ
1
`
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
psT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt ‘i c, xtqqlogpsT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq
looooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
T t,ℓ
2
`
ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
hps T´t pyt, xtqq ´
ÿ
yℓ:dHpyℓ,xℓq“1
hps T´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqq
looooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
T t,ℓ
3
,
wherehpxq “xlogx´x`1. We proceed by bounding each term separately.
•For termT t,ℓ
1 , notice thatT t,ℓ
1 is independent oft. In view of definition of score entropy loss, we have
Exℓ,xt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
”
T t,ℓ
1
ı
(69)
“E xℓ,xt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
»
– ÿ
yℓ:dHpyℓ,xℓq“1
sT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqDp psT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓq, sT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqq
fi
fl
“S¨E xℓ,xt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
»
– ÿ
yℓ:dHpyℓ,xℓq“1
QT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqsT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqDp psT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓq, sT´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqq
fi
fl
“S¨L SEpT´ℓ, psT´ℓ , sT´ℓ q,(70)
where we use the fact thatQT´t py, xq “S ´1 for anyd Hpy, xq “1.
•For termT t,ℓ
2 , we establish the following lemma, whose proof is provided in Section E.2.
Lemma 8.Consider the uniform noising process and let0ďℓătăT. Then, for anycP rSs,iP rds
andx ℓ PX, it obeys
Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq
”`
sT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
˘
log psT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq
ı
“0.
With Lemma 8, it is easily seen that
Exℓ,xt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
”
T t,ℓ
2
ı
“E xℓ,xt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
« ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
`
sT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
˘
log psT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq
ff
“
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
Exℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
„
Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq
”`
sT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
˘
log psT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq
ıȷ
“0. (71)
•For termT t,ℓ
3 , we make the crucial observation thatExt„
Ð
q t
rř
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1 hpsT´t pyt, xtqqsadmits a
simple representation. The statement is formalized in the following lemma.
Lemma 9.For anytP r0, Ts, we have
Ext„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
hps T´t pyt, xtqq
fi
fl“E xt„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
´logps T´t pyt, xtqq
fi
fl.
34

[PDF page 35]
In view of this lemma, we can further express the termTt,ℓ
3 as
Exℓ,xt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
”
T t,ℓ
3
ı
(72)
“E xt„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
hps T´t pyt, xtqq
fi
fl´E xℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
»
– ÿ
yℓ:dHpyℓ,xℓq“1
hps T´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqq
fi
fl
“E xt„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
´logps T´t pyt, xtqq
fi
fl´E xℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
»
– ÿ
yℓ:dHpyℓ,xℓq“1
´logps T´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqq
fi
fl.(73)
Plugging Eqns. (70), (71), and (73) into Eqn. (68), we end up with
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pyt, xtqDp psT´t k pxtk ‘i c, xtk q, sT´t pyt, xtqq
“S¨L SEpT´ℓ, psT´ℓ , sT´ℓ q `E xt„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
´logps T´t pyt, xtqq
fi
fl
´E xℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
»
– ÿ
yℓ:dHpyℓ,xℓq“1
´logps T´ℓ pyℓ, xℓqq
fi
fl
“S¨L SEpT´ℓ,ps T´ℓ , sT´ℓ q `S
`
φpT´tq ´φpT´ℓq
˘
,
where we defineφptqas
φptq :“ 1
S Ext„qt
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
´logps tpyt, xtqq
fi
fl.(74)
Returning to Eqn. (67), we conclude that
KLpp0}qT q ďe ´T dlogpSq `
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
LSEpT´t k, psT´t k , sT´t k q `
`
φpT´tq ´φpT´t kq
˘
dt
ďε score `e ´T dlogpSq `
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
`
φpT´tq ´φpT´t kq
˘
dt.(75)
To establish Theorem 1, it is only left for us to control the last term in Eqn. (75). First, by Jensen’s
inequality,φptqis lower bounded by
φptq ě ´ 1
S
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
log
`
Ext„qt rstpxt ‘i c, xtqs
˘
“0.(76)
For the upper bound, from the definition ofφptq, it satisfies that
φptq ď 1
S Ext„qt
«
ˇˇtyt : dHpyt, xtq “1u
ˇˇ ¨sup
x,y:dHpx,yq“1
ˇˇ logps tpy, xqq
ˇˇ
ff
,(77)
where|ty t : dHpyt, xtq “1u|denotes the cardinality of the setty t : dHpyt, xtq “1u, which equalsdpS´1q
for anyx t PX. It therefore suffices to control the quantity|logps tpyt, xtqq |, which is achieved through the
following lemma.
Lemma 10.For any distributionq 0 onX, letq t be the marginal distribution of the uniform noising process
at timet. Then, for anyx, yPXsuch thatd Hpx, yq “1, it holds that
|logs tpy, xq| ÀlogpSq `maxtlogpt ´1q,0u.
35

[PDF page 36]
As a consequence of Lemma 10, we arrive at
φptq ď dpS´1q
S ¨sup
x,y:dHpx,yq“1
|logps tpy, xqq | Àd
`
logpSq `maxtlogpt ´1q,0u
˘
.(78)
In addition, we make the observation in Lemma 12 thatφptqis a non-increasing function int.
Now we are ready to combine everything and bound the last term of Eqn. (75). Define∆“maxkttk`1 ´
tku, and choose1ďMďN´1such thatT´t M P r∆,2∆s. Armed with Eqns. (76), (78) and the
monotonicity ofφptq, we obtain
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
`
φpT´tq ´φpT´t kq
˘
dt
ď
ż T´t M
0
φptqdt`
M´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
`
φpT´t k`1q ´φpT´t kq
˘
dt
ď2∆d
`
logpSq `logp2{∆q `1
˘
`∆
N´2ÿ
k“0
`
φpT´t k`1q ´φpT´t kq
˘
ď2∆d
`
logpSq `logp2{∆q `1
˘
`∆φp∆q À∆dlogpS{∆q.
Combining the inequality above with Eqn. (75) achieves
KLpp0}qT q ďε score `e ´T dlogpSq `∆dlogpS{∆q,
which completes the proof of Theorem 1.
C.2 Proof of Corollary 1
Choose time horizonT“logpdlogpSq{εqand number of discretization steps
N“Θ
ˆ dlogpSqlog 3pdlogpSq{εq
ε
˙
“ rΘ
ˆ d
ε
˙
.
Adopting the upper bound in Theorem 1 leads to
KLpqdata}poutputq “KLpq 0}pT q Àε score `e T dlogpSq ` T d
N log
ˆ SN
T
˙
Àε score `ε` ε
logpSqT 2
´
logpSq `3T
¯
Àε score `ε.
C.3 Proof of Theorem 2
Recall that the path measures of the backward process and the sampling process are denoted byQ d“
t
Ð
q tutPr0,T´δs andP d“ tp tutPr0,T´δs, respectively. It can be checked that the path measureQis absolutely
continuous with respect toP. By Girsanov’s theorem for the backward process (e.g. Ren et al. (2025,
Corollary 3.4)), it satisfies
KLpQ}Pq
“KLp
Ð
q 0}p0q ` 1
S
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
„ ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
Dp psT´t k pxtk ‘i c, xtk q, sT´t pxt ‘i c, xtqqdt
ȷ
.
36

[PDF page 37]
Following the same analysis for Eqn. (68) in Appendix C.1, we arrive at
KLpQ}Pq “ε score `KLp
Ð
q 0}p0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
pφpT´tq ´φpT´t kqqdt
“ε score `KLpq T }p0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
pφpT´tq ´φpT´t kqqdt,
where the functionφp¨qis defined as in Eqn. (74)
φptq :“ 1
S Ext„qt
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
´log pstpyt, xtqq
fi
fl.
Thus, to achieveKLpQ}Pq ďε score `Op1q, we need to selectN, Tand step size schedule such that
KLpqT }p0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
pφpT´tq ´φpT´t kqqdt“Op1q.(79)
In order to understand the first term in Eqn. (79), let us first consider the case whenT“1. By the
assumptionq 0 PP γpXq, therefore, we are ensured that
KLpq1}p0q “
ÿ
xPX
q1pxqlog
`
q1pxqq ´
ÿ
xPX
q1pxqlog
`
p0pxqq ěγdlogpSq "1.
Hence, it implies thatTmust satisfyTą1.
We then focus on the analysis of the second term in Eqn. (79). We aim to show that the changing rate,
i.e.,´φ 1ptq, is lower bounded as we come close to the target data distribution (i.e.,tP r0,1sq, which in turn
leads to a lower bound on the differenceφpT´tq ´φpT´t kq. We proceed with our analysis under the
information-theoretic framework.
For notational convenience, given everyiP rdsandcP rSs, let us define
φi,cptq “E xt„qt
“
´log
`
stpxt ‘i c, xtq
‰
“E xt„qt
“
´log
`
stpNi,cpxtq, xtq
‰
(80)
where the operatorNi,c :XÑXis defined asN i,cpxq “x‘ i c. It is easy to check that
φptq “ 1
S
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
φi,cptq.
Notice thatN i,c is a bijection inX. We defineNi,´c “ pN i,cq´1 “N i,S´c, wherepN i,cq´1 is denoted as the
inverse function ofNi,c.
Sinceφptqcan be written as a linear combination ofφ i,cptq, it suffices to study the properties of the
individualφ i,cptqto characterizeφptq. To begin with, the following lemma provides a characterization of
φptqandφ i,cptqas information-theoretic quantities.
Lemma 11.Forφptqandφ i,cptqdefined in Eqns.(74)and(80), we have
φi,cptq “KLpq t } pNi,´cq#qtq;
φptq “ ´ B
Bt KLpqt}p0q “
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
KLpqt } pNi,cq#qtq,
wherepN i,cq# is denoted as the pushforward measure ofqt under operatorN i,c.
Here, the pushforward measure gives, for anyxPX,
pNi,´cq#qtpxq “q t pNi,cpxqq.(81)
37

[PDF page 38]
Lemma 11 allows us to writeφi,cptqas the KL divergence between the marginal forward process and its
pushforward underN i,c. By viewingN i,c as an information channel, we can show it is in a special family
of channels, namedS-ary symmetric channel (Makur and Polyanskiy, 2018), which satisfies strong data
processing inequality. Through this idea, we can prove the following lemma. The details are provided in
Section E.6.
Lemma 12.FortP p0, Ts,φ i,cptqis differentiable intand it holds that
´φ1
i,cptq ěφ i,cptq.
Consequently, Lemma 12 leads to
´φ1ptq “ ´ 1
S
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
φ1
icptq ě 1
S
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
φicptq “φptq.
Recall the log-Sobolev inequality in Lemma 7. We have, for any target distributionq0 PP γpXqandtP p0,1q,
´φ1ptq ěφptq ěKLpq t}p0q ěKLpq 1}p0q ěγdlogpSq.
Equipped with the above relation, we are ready to control the second term in Eqn. (79). By the funda-
mental theorem of calculus, we obtain
ż tk`1
tk
pφpT´tq ´φpT´t kqqdt“
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
ż T´t k
T´t
´φ1pτqdτdt
Á
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
pt´t kqγdlogpSqdt“ 1
2 ptk`1 ´t kq2γdlogpSq.
ChooseMsuch thatT´t M P r 1
2 ,1s. SuchMexists due to the fact thatTą1andmax kttk`1 ´t ku ď 1
2.
It holds in this case that
Op1q “
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
pφpT´tq ´φpT´t kqqdt
Á
N´1ÿ
k“M
ż tk`1
tk
pφpT´tq ´φpT´t kqqdt
Á
N´1ÿ
k“M
ptk`1 ´t kq2γdlogpSq.(82)
By Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, it is direct to show that
N´1ÿ
k“M
ptk`1 ´t kq2 ě 1
N´M
˜ N´1ÿ
k“M
ptk`1 ´t kq
¸2
“ pT´t M ´δq 2
N´M Á 1
N´M ,(83)
where in the last inequality, we use the fact thatT´tM ě 1
2 andδ!1. Plugging Eqn. (83) into Eqn. (82)
leads to
NěN´M“ΩpγdlogpSqq “ rΩpdq.
C.4 Efficient sampling for high-entropy distributions
In the discussion following Theorem 2, we pointed out that theτ-leaping algorithm can attain sublinear
iteration complexity indfor the uniform noising process when the target distribution is close to the uniform
distribution onX. We now state this result formally.
38

[PDF page 39]
Theorem 4.Letq 0 PPpXqdenote the data distribution. Choose time points0“t 0 ăt 1 ă. . .ăt N “T´δ
with exponential-then-constant step size schedule, i.e.,tk`1 ´t k ďκminp1, T´t k`1qfork“0, . . . , N´2.
Suppose0ăκă0.9. Then,
KLpqT´δ }p outputq Àε score `
`
e´T `κlogpδ ´1q
˘
¨KLpq 0 }UnifpXqq.
Theorem 4 reveals that, with an exponential-then-constant schedule and early stopping timeδ, the error
upper bound depends only on the initial KL divergenceKLpq0 }UnifpXqq, which can potentially be small if
q0 is close to the forward limit distributionUnifpXq.
To be more concrete, we can chooseT“logpKLpq0 }UnifpXqq{εq,δ ´1 “polypdqandκ“e ´T {logpdqto
achieve
KLpqT´δ }p outputq Àε score `ε,
with iteration complexity
N“ rΘ
ˆ KLpq0 }UnifpXqq
ε
˙
.
In particular, this bound is sublinear indwhenKLpq0 }UnifpXqq “opdq.
Proof of Theorem 4.The proof proceeds along the same lines as the proof of Theorem 1.
Writep 0 “UnifpXqas the initial distribution of the sampling process. Following the proof of Eqn. (75),
we bound
KLpqT´δ }p T´δ q ďε score `e ´T KLpq0 }p 0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
`
φpT´tq ´φpT´t kq
˘
dt,(84)
where as shown in Lemma 11,φptq “ ´BtKLpqt }p 0q ě0. By Lemma 12,φptqis a non-increasing function
oftP p0, Ts, which leads to
φptq ď 1
t
ż t
0
BsKLpqs }p 0qds“ KLpq0 }p 0q
t .(85)
Without loss of generality, ChooseMsuch that1ďMďN´1such thatT´t M “1. For1ďkăM,
tk`1 ´t k “t k ´t k´1 “κ. With Eqn. (85), it can be seen that
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
`
φpT´tq ´φpT´t kq
˘
dt
ď
N´1ÿ
k“0
ptk`1 ´t kq
`
φpT´t k`1q ´φpT´t kq
˘
dt
“ pt N ´t N´1 qφpT´t N q `
N´1ÿ
k“1
`
ptk ´t k´1q ` ptk ´t k`1q
˘
φpT´t kq ´ pt1 ´t 0qφpTq
paq
ď κδ
1´κ ¨ KLpq0 }p 0q
δ `
N´1ÿ
k“M
κ2
1´κ pT´t kq ¨ KLpq0 }p 0q
T´t k
À pN´Mqκ 2KLpq0 }p 0q “log p1´κqpδqκ2KLpq0 }p 0q
pbq
ďκlogpδ ´1qKLpq0 }p 0q,
where we apply Eqn. (85) in (a) andlogp1´κq ď ´κin (b). Putting the above bound and Eqn. (84) together
proves the desired result.
39

[PDF page 40]
D Proofs of results in Section 3.2
D.1 Proof of Theorem 3
FortP tt 0, . . . , tN u, letp t denote the marginal distribution ofxtk in Algorithm 1. Using the data-processing
inequalityKLp
Ð
q T }pT q ďKLp
Ð
q t0,...,tN }pt0,...,tN qand Lemma 4, we decompose the KL divergence between the
target distributionq 0 ”
Ð
q T and the output distributionpT as follows:
KLp
Ð
q T }pT q ďKLp
Ð
q 0}p0q `
N´1ÿ
k“0
Extk „
Ð
q tk
”
KL
´Ð
q tk`1|tk p¨|xtk q}ptk`1|tk p¨|xtk q
¯ı
.(86)
The first term,initialization error, was bounded in Conforti et al. (2025); Liang et al. (2025b) as follows:
KLp
Ð
q 0}p0q ďe ´T dp1`logS`Tq Àe ´T dlogS.(87)
Next, we move on to control the second term. The following lemma states that for eachk, conditioned
onx tk, one can consider a CTMC on the intervalrtk, tk`1s, with marginalsptk`1|tk p¨ |x tk qat timet k`1. The
proof is given in Section F.3.
Lemma 13.Fixk“0, . . . , N´1. Letx tk andx tk`1 be as in Algorithm 1. LetpytqtPrtk,tk`1s be a CTMC
withy tk “x tk and the following rate matrix:
pQtpa, bq :“
$
’&
’%
psT´t k pytk di bi, ytk q eT´t k ´1
eT´t ´1 Itai “MASKu,ifd Hpa, bq “1, a i ‰b i,andy i
tk “MASK,
´ ř
c‰a pQtpa, cq,ifa“b,
0,otherwise.
(88)
Then,x tk`1 has the same distribution asytk`1.
Armed with this result, we rewrite the right hand side of Eqn. (86) with marginalspt|tk p¨ |x tk qof this
CTMC:
KLp
Ð
q T }pT q Àe ´T dlogS`
N´1ÿ
k“0
Extk „
Ð
q tk
”
KL
´Ð
q tk`1|tk p¨|xtk q}ptk`1|tk p¨|xtk q
¯ı
(89)
“e ´T dlogS`
N´1ÿ
k“0
Extk „
Ð
q tk
„ż tk`1
tk
B
Bt KL
´Ð
q t|tk p¨ |x tk q}pt|tk p¨ |x tk q
¯
dt
ȷ
.(90)
To further control the second term above, we apply Lemma 5 with rate matrices specified in Lemma 13. We
can write
KLp
Ð
q T }pT q
Àe ´T dlogS`
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
ÿ
y‰xt
«
pQtpxt, yq ´
Ð
Qtpxt, yq `
Ð
Qtpxt, yqlog
˜ Ð
Qtpxt, yq
pQtpxt, yq
¸ff
dt.(91)
FixkP t0, . . . , N´1uandtP rt k, tk`1q. Letℓ :“t k. Invoking Eqn. (88) further leads to
ÿ
y‰xt
«
pQtpxt, yq ´
Ð
Qtpxt, yq `
Ð
Qtpxt, yqlog
˜ Ð
Qtpxt, yq
pQtpxt, yq
¸ff
“
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
«
pQtpxt, xt di cq ´
Ð
Qtpxt, xt di cq `
Ð
Qtpxt, xt di cqlog
˜ Ð
Qtpxt, xt di cq
pQtpxt, xt di cq
¸ff
40

[PDF page 41]
“
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
«
eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt di c, xtq
`s T´t pxt di c, xtqlog
˜
sT´t pxt di c, xtq
eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
¸ ff
“
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt di c, xtqD
ˆ eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq, sT´t pxt di c, xtq
˙
.(92)
To proceed, we make the observation that the Bregman divergence satisfies the following law of cosines:
Dpα, γq “Dpα, βq `Dpβ, γq ` pα´βq β´γ
βγ .
We apply this decomposition to each term of Eqn. (92) with
α“ eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq, β“ eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq,andγ“s T´t pxt di c, xtq.
In the following, we slightly abuse the notation and writext :“ px t di c, xtqandx ℓ :“ px ℓ di c, xℓqwhenever
iPmpx tqandcP rSsare fixed. For fixedi, c, each term in Eqn. (92) can be decomposed as
sT´t pxtqD
ˆ eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´t pxtq
˙
“s T´t pxtqDppsT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´ℓ pxℓqq
`s T´t pxtqD
ˆ eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 sT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´t pxtq
˙
` psT´ℓ pxℓq ´s T´ℓ pxℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓq
ˆ eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 sT´ℓ pxℓq ´s T´t pxtq
˙
.
Note that we simplified the first term asDpαx, αyq “Dpx, yq. Observing that eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 sT´ℓ ”s T´t
by Eqn. (60), this can be rearranged as follows:
sT´t pxtqD
ˆ eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´t pxtq
˙
“ eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 sT´ℓ pxℓqDppsT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´ℓ pxℓqq
loooooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooooon
“: T1
`
`
sT´t pxℓq ´s T´t pxtq
˘
¨log psT´ℓ pxℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓqlooooooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooooooon
“: T2
`s T´t pxtqDps T´t pxℓq, sT´t pxtqqlooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooon
“: T3
.
Taking the above collectively with Eqns. (92) and (91) leads to
KLp
Ð
q T }pT q Àe ´T dlogS`
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
pT1 `T 2 `T 3q.
Now, it suffices to control each term on the right, respectively.
•After taking a summation overiPmpx tqandcP rSswe connect the first term,T 1, to the score entropy
loss. To see that, direct calculations show
Ext,xℓ„
Ð
q t,ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
eT´ℓ ´1
eT´t ´1 sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqDppsT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq, sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqq
41

[PDF page 42]
“E xℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
et´ℓsT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqDppsT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq, sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqq
“e t´ℓLSEpT´ℓ, psT´ℓ , sT´ℓ q,
where we used in the second line thatPrpxi
t “MASK|x i
ℓ “MASKq “ 1´e´pT´tq
1´e´pT´ℓq . Therefore, recalling
thatℓ :“t k,
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
et´tk LSEpT´t k,psT´t k , sT´t k qdt“
N´1ÿ
k“0
petk`1´tk ´1qL SEpT´t k,psT´t k , sT´t k q Àε score,
(93)
where we used∆“Op1qand Assumption 1 in the last inequality.
•To control the second term,T2, the next lemma describes a martingale property of the score function.
The proof is given in Section E.7.
Lemma 14.Consider the masking noising process and let0ďℓătăT. Then, for anycPVand
iPmpx ℓq,
Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq rpsT´t pxℓ di c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt di c, xtqqItiPmpx tqus “0.
In view of Lemma 14, we conclude that the second term,T2, contributes zero after conditioning onxtk:
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
Ext„
Ð
q t|tk p¨|xtk qItiPmpx tqupsT´t pxtk di c, xtk q ´s T´t pxt di c, xtqq “0.
•Lastly, we move on to control the last term,T3. Towards this goal, we introduce the following lemma,
whose proof is provided in Section F.4.
Lemma 15.Let0ďℓătďT. Then, forIptqdefined in Eqn.(16),
Exℓ,xt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt di c, xtqDps T´t pxℓ di c, xℓq, sT´t pxt di c, xtqq
“
ż t
ℓ
et´vIpT´vqdv.(94)
After the summation overiPmpx tqandcP rSs, we express the contributions of the termT 3 us-
ing Lemma 15 as follows:
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt di c, xtqDps T´t pxtk di c, xtk q, sT´t pxt di c, xtqqdt
“
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
ż t
tk
et´vIpT´vqdvdtď
N´1ÿ
k“0
hk
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
Iptqdt,(95)
where we used∆“Op1qand non-negativity of conditional mutual information in the last inequality.
Collecting Eqns. (87), (93), and (95) proves
KLpq0 }p T q Àε score `e ´T dlogS`
N´1ÿ
k“0
hk
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
Iptqdt.
42

[PDF page 43]
D.2 Proof of Corollary 2
We upper bound the last term of Eqn. (17) under uniform and exponential-then-constant step size schedules.
First, under the constant step size schedule, the quantity of interest satisfies
N´1ÿ
k“0
hk
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
Iptqdt“ T
N
ż T
0
Iptqdtď T
N
ż 8
0
Iptqdt“ T
N Bpq0q,
where the last inequality follows from Lemma 16. Therefore, as long as
Ně TBpq 0q
ε “ rO
ˆ Bpq0q
ε
˙
,
Eqn. (17) leads toKLpq0}pT q Àε score `ε.
Next, under exponential-then-constant step size schedule, we bound the last term of Eqn. (17) as follows:
N´1ÿ
k“0
hk
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
Iptqdt“ ε
dlogpSq
ż ε{pdlogSq
0
Iptqdt`
N´2ÿ
k“0
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
ptk`1 ´t kqIptqdt
ď ε2
logpSq `κ
N´2ÿ
k“0
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
minp1, T´t k`1qIptqdtďε`κ
ż T
0
minp1, tqIptqdtďε`κDpq 0q.
ForNą0, such step size schedule is possible withκ“O
´
T`logpε ´1dlogpSqq
N
¯
. Thus, choosing
Ně pT`logpε ´1dlogpSqqqDpq 0q
ε “ rO
ˆ Dpq0q
ε
˙
givesKLpq 0 }p T q Àε score `ε.
D.3τ-leaping for masking discrete diffusion
In this section, we prove the analogue of Theorem 3 for the truncatedτ-leaping algorithm. Note that since
applying multiple jumps on a single coordinate is ill-defined in masking noising process (where should we
transition if theτ-leaping algorithm requires two transitionsMASKÑ1at some coordinate?), we analyse
the truncated version (Eqn. (9)) instead of the classicalτ-leaping algorithm.
Theorem 5.Letq data “q 0 be the target distribution onrSsd. Let0ăδăTand0“t 0 ăt 1 ă. . .ăt N “
T´δ, such thath k :“t k ´t k´1 ďκminp1, T´t kqforkP rNs, andκ“Op1q. Let
p0 :“
˜
`
1´e ´T ˘
δMASK ` e´T
S
Sÿ
k“1
δk
¸bd
.
Under Assumption 1, truncatedτ-leaping Eqn.(9)initialized atp 0 produces a sample frompoutput :“p T´δ,
such that
KLpqδ }p outputq Àε score `e ´T dlogpSq `
N´1ÿ
k“0
hk`1
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
Iptqdt`κ 3N d`κC,(96)
where
C :“
N´1ÿ
k“0
ptk`1 ´t kqExtk „
Ð
q tk
ÿ
iPmpxtk q
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t k pxtk di c, xtk q
log psT´t k pxtk di c, xtk q
sT´t k pxtk di c, xtk q
.
Consequently, with exponential-then-constant step size schedule whereκ“O
´
T`logpδ ´1q
N
¯
, for anyεą0,
forT“Oplogpε ´1dlogSqqand
N“ rO
˜
Dpqdataq `C
ε `
c
d
ε
¸
,(97)
43

[PDF page 44]
it satisfies
KLpqδ}poutputq Àε score `ε.
Note that the guarantee in Eqn. (96) closely parallels Eqn. (17) in Theorem 3 for Algorithm 1. In
particular, two additional terms arise in the analysis of the truncatedτ-leaping algorithm. We expect the
constantCto be small and remark that it also arises in the analysis of Conforti et al. (2025), asCM
2 in
Theorem 3.2.1, in the form of the maximum rather than the average. Under the assumption of (one-sided)
boundedness psT´t k ěM ´1, the constantCcan be upper bounded via the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, as
the next corollary shows.
Corollary 3.Consider the setting of Theorem 5. If, additionally, there existsMą0such that for all
kP t0, . . . , N´1u,xP prSs Y tMASKuq d,iPmpxq, andcP rSsit holdslog psT´t k pxd i c, xq ě ´logM, it is
sufficient for
N“ rO
˜
Dpqdataq ` ?εscoredlogM
ε `
c
d
ε
¸
to ensure
KLpqδ}pT´δ q Àε score `ε.
Proof.For fixedkP t0, . . . , Nuandℓ :“t k, by the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, it satisfies
Exℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
log psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq

ď
¨
˝Exℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
˛
‚
1{2 ¨
˝Exℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
ˆ
log psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
˙2
˛
‚
1{2
ď
?
d
¨
˝Exℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
ˆ
log psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
˙2
˛
‚
1{2
.
Next, usingz´1´logzÁ plogzq 2
B forlogzě ´B, together with
log psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq ě ´logM`log
`
eT´ℓ ´1
˘
ě ´logM`logpT´ℓq ě ´logpM δ ´1q,
we upper bound
Exℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
ˆ
log psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
˙2
ďlogpM δ ´1q ˆE xℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqDppsT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq, sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqq.
As a result,Ccan be controlled as
C :“
N´1ÿ
k“0
ptk`1 ´t kqExtk „
Ð
q tk
ÿ
iPmpxtk q
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t k pxtk di c, xtk q
log psT´t k pxtk di c, xtk q
sT´t k pxtk di c, xtk q

ď
a
dlogpM δ ´1qˆ
N´1ÿ
k“0
ptk`1 ´t kq
¨
˝Extk „
Ð
q tk
ÿ
iPmpxtk q
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t k pxtk di c, xtk qDppsT´t k pxtk di c, xtk q, sT´t k pxtk di c, xtk qq
˛
‚
1{2
44

[PDF page 45]
paq
ď
a
κN dlogpM δ´1qˆ
¨
˝
N´1ÿ
k“0
ptk`1 ´t kqExtk „
Ð
q tk
ÿ
iPmpxtk q
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t k pxtk di c, xtk qDppsT´t k pxtk di c, xtk q, sT´t k pxtk di c, xtk qq
˛
‚
1{2
ď
a
κN dlogpM δ´1qεscore,(98)
where inpaqwe usedt k`1 ´t k ďκtogether with the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality. Combining the bound
of Eqn. (98) with Eqn. (97) andκ“rOp1{Nqcompletes the proof.
We emphasize that, in contrast to Theorem 3, in Theorem 5 we require early stopping for someδą0,
which in turn leads to the exponential-then-constant step size schedule. We now elaborate on the difference
between Theorem 5 and Theorem 3, and provide some intuition for the appearance of the two additional
terms in Eqn. (96).
Remark3.To obtain an accurate sampler, it is natural to require thatpQt «
Ð
Qt uniformly for alltP r0, Ts.
The main challenge is that we only have access to score estimates at discrete time points. In the truncated
τ-leaping algorithm analyzed in this section, this results in approximating
psT´t :“psT´t k «s T´t .
Informally, we establish this by showing
psT´t k «s T´t k «s T´t ,(99)
where the first approximation is ensured by Assumption 1 and the second results from the properties of the
score function for the masking noising process, requiring the step sizetk`1 ´t k to be small.
In contrast, for Algorithm 1 considered in Theorem 3, the conditionpQt «
Ð
Qt translates to
psT´t :“ eT´t k ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´t k «s T´t .
In view of Proposition 6, the above condition is equivalent to
psT´t :“ eT´t k ´1
eT´t ´1 psT´t k « eT´t k ´1
eT´t ´1 sT´t k “s T´t ,
which is guaranteed by Assumption 1. Notably, this simple rescaling eliminates the need for the second
approximation step that is required in the truncatedτ-leaping analysis. This distinction explains why
Theorem 5 contains two additional error terms and necessitates early stopping, in contrast to the cleaner
guarantee obtained in Theorem 3.
Proof of Theorem 5.The proof follows the proof of Theorem 3 closely with several additional steps. We
begin with Eqn. (91)
KLp
Ð
q T }pT q
Àe ´T dlogS`
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
ÿ
y‰xt
«
pQtpxt, yq ´
Ð
Qtpxt, yq `
Ð
Qtpxt, yqlog
˜ Ð
Qtpxt, yq
pQtpxt, yq
¸ff
dt.(100)
Next, since for this sampler, the rate matricespQt are given by the following:
pQtpx, yq :“
$
’&
’%
psT´t k pxtk di yi, xtk qItxi “MASKu,ifd Hpx, yq “1, x i ‰y i,andx i
tk “MASK,
´ ř
z‰x pQtpx, zq,ify“x,
0,otherwise,
45

[PDF page 46]
we can therefore bound
ÿ
y‰xt
«
pQtpxt, yq ´
Ð
Qtpxt, yq `
Ð
Qtpxt, yqlog
˜ Ð
Qtpxt, yq
pQtpxt, yq
¸ff
“
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
«
pQtpxt, xt di cq ´
Ð
Qtpxt, xt di cq `
Ð
Qtpxt, xt di cqlog
˜ Ð
Qtpxt, xt di cq
pQtpxt, xt di cq
¸ff
“
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
„
psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt di c, xtq `s T´t pxt di c, xtqlog
ˆ sT´t pxt di c, xtq
psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
˙ȷ
“
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt di c, xtqDp psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq, sT´t pxt di c, xtqq.
To proceed, we again apply the law of cosinesDpα, γq “Dpα, βq `Dpβ, γq ` pα´βq β´γ
βγ with
α“psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq, β“s T´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq,andγ“s T´t pxt di c, xtq.
In the following, we slightly abuse the notation and writext :“ px t di c, xtqandx ℓ :“ px ℓ di c, xℓqwhenever
iPmpx tqandcP rSsare fixed. As a result, for fixedi, c, one has
sT´t pxtqDppsT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´t pxtqq
“s T´t pxtqDppsT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´ℓ pxℓqq `s T´t pxtqDps T´ℓ pxℓq, sT´t pxtqq
` psT´ℓ pxℓq ´s T´ℓ pxℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓq psT´ℓ pxℓq ´s T´t pxtqq.
This can be rearranged as follows:
sT´t pxtqDp psT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´t pxtqq “s T´ℓ pxℓqDppsT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´ℓ pxℓqqlooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooon
“: T1
`s T´t pxtqDps T´ℓ pxℓq, sT´t pxtqqlooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooon
“: T2
` psT´ℓ pxℓq ´s T´t pxtqqlog psT´ℓ pxℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓqloooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooon
“: T3
.
It is therefore sufficient to control each term separately. Similar to the proof of Theorem 3, the first term,
T1, after the summation is upper bounded by the score entropy loss
Ext,xℓ„
Ð
q t,ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqDppsT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq, sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqq
ďE xℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqDppsT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq, sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqq
“L SEpT´ℓ, psT´ℓ , sT´ℓ q,
and, by Assumption 1,
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
LSEpT´ℓ,ps T´ℓ , sT´ℓ qdtďε score.(101)
Now, we turn to controlling the termsT 2 andT 3 which require a different treatment than in the proof
of Theorem 3.
46

[PDF page 47]
For the termT2, we again apply the law of cosines with
α“s T´ℓ pxℓq, β“s T´t pxℓq,andγ“s T´t pxtq.
This leads to the following decomposition
sT´t pxtqDpsT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´t pxtqq “s T´t pxtqDpsT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´t pxℓqqlooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooon
“: T21
`s T´t pxtqDpsT´t pxℓq, sT´t pxtqqlooooooooooooooooooomooooooooooooooooooon
“: T22
` psT´t pxℓq ´s T´t pxtqq sT´ℓ pxℓq ´s T´t pxℓq
sT´t pxℓqloooooooooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooooooooon
“: T23
.
•ForT 21, using Eqn. (60), observe that
DpsT´ℓ pxℓq, sT´t pxℓqq “ eT´t ´1
eT´ℓ ´1 ´1´log eT´t ´1
eT´ℓ ´1 ď peT´ℓ ´e T´t q2
2peT´ℓ ´1qpe T´t ´1q Àκ 2,
whereκis a parameter of the step size schedule:tk`1 ´t k ďκminp1, T´t k`1q. The total contribution
of termsT 21 is:
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Ext,xtk „
Ð
q t,tk
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt di c, xtqDpsT´t k pxtk di c, xtk q, sT´t pxtk di c, xtk qqdt
Àκ 3
N´1ÿ
k“0
Ext„
Ð
q t
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt di c, xtq
“κ 3
N´1ÿ
k“0
Ext„
Ð
q t
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ř
cPrSs qtpxt di cq
qtpxtq ďκ 3N d,(102)
as ř
cPrSs qtpxt di cq “q tpxtq.
•The termT 22 is identical to the termT2 from the proof of Theorem 3, thus we use Lemma 15 and
obtain that after summation of overiPmpxtqandcP rSs:
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt di c, xtqDps T´t pxtk di c, xtk q, sT´t pxt di c, xtqqdt.
“
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
ż t
tk
et´vIpT´vqdvdtÀ
N´1ÿ
k“0
hk`1
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
Iptqdt.(103)
Here, we invoke the assumptionκ“Op1qand the non-negativity of conditional mutual information in
the last inequality.
•To controlT 23, observe that by Eqn. (60), the score function satisfies the relation
sT´ℓ pxℓq ´s T´t pxℓq
sT´t pxℓq “ eT´t ´e T´ℓ
eT´ℓ ´1 ,
and importantly it does not depend onxℓ. This implies that upon summation overiPmpx tqand
cP rSs, the termT 23 contributes zero, i.e.,
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
psT´t pxℓ di c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt di c, xtqq eT´t ´e T´ℓ
eT´ℓ ´1
47

[PDF page 48]
“ eT´t ´e T´ℓ
eT´ℓ ´1
ÿ
iPmpxtq
˜ ř
cPrSs qtpxℓ di cq
qtpxℓq ´
ř
cPrSs qtpxt di cq
qtpxtq
¸
“ eT´t ´e T´ℓ
eT´ℓ ´1
ÿ
iPmpxtq
p1´1q
“0.
Putting pieces together, we can conclude
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Extk ,xt„
Ð
q tk ,t
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
T2 ďκ 3N d`
N´1ÿ
k“0
hk`1
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
Iptqdt.(104)
It therefore remains to control termT3. Recall the definition
T3 :“ ps T´ℓ pxℓq ´s T´t pxtqqlog psT´ℓ pxℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓq .
Crucially, unlike in the proof of Theorem 3, we no longer have a martingale property for this term. However,
we can decompose
T3 “ ps T´ℓ pxℓq ´s T´t pxℓqqlog psT´ℓ pxℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓq ` psT´t pxℓq ´s T´t pxtqqlog psT´ℓ pxℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓqloooooooooooooooooooooomoooooooooooooooooooooon
contributes zero by Lemma 14
.
It remains to bound the first term, which can be written as
psT´ℓ pxℓq ´s T´t pxℓqqlog psT´ℓ pxℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓq “ eT´t ´e T´ℓ
eT´t ´1 sT´ℓ pxℓqlog psT´ℓ pxℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓq .
In view of the step size assumptiontk`1 ´t k ďκminp1, T´t k`1q, it satisfies

eT´t ´e T´ℓ
eT´t ´1
 Àκ.
The total contribution of termsT3 can therefore be upper bounded by the following:
κ
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż tk`1
tk
Exℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
log psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
dt
“κ
N´1ÿ
k“0
ptk`1 ´t kqExℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
log psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
.(105)
Collecting Eqns. (100), (101), (102), (106), and (105) proves
KLpqδ }p T´δ q Àε score `e ´T dlogpSq `
N´1ÿ
k“0
hk`1
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
Iptqdt`κ 3N d`κC,
where
C :“
N´1ÿ
k“0
ptk`1 ´t kqExℓ„
Ð
q ℓ
ÿ
iPmpxℓq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
log psT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
sT´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓq
.
For our step size schedule, as in Corollary 2, we upper bound
N´1ÿ
k“0
hk`1
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
Iptqdtďκ
N´1ÿ
k“0
ż T´t k
T´t k`1
minp1, T´t k`1qIptqdtďκ
ż T
δ
minp1, tqIptqdtďκDpq dataq.(106)
48

[PDF page 49]
Plugging in the choicesκ“O
´
T`logpδ ´1q
N
¯
,T“Oplogpε ´1dlogSqq, and
N“ rO
˜
Dpqdataq `C
ε `
c
d
ε
¸
,
yieldsKLpq δ}pT´δ q Àε score `ε.
E Proofs of the main lemmas
E.1 Characterization ofBpq dataqandCpq dataq
The characterization ofBpqdataqandCpq dataqis summarized in the following lemma.
Lemma 16.Consider a masking noising process with initial distributionq 0 “q data. LetCpq dataqand
Bpqdataqbe the total correlation and dual total correlation. Then,
Bpqdataq “
ż 8
0
IptqdtandCpq dataq “
ż 8
0
pet ´1qIptqdt.
Consequently,Dpq dataq ďminpBpq dataq,Cpq dataqq.
Proof.Letp”pptq “e ´t be the probability that at timeta coordinate is unmasked andXppq ”
pX1, . . . , Xdq :“ px 1
t , . . . , xd
t q. We also denoteX R :“x ´pi,jq
t andX R :“ pX iqiPR forRĎ rds. With a
slight abuse of notation we writeIppq:“Iptppqq. We have
Ippq :“
ÿ
i‰j
IpXi;X j |X Rq “
ÿ
i‰j
p2 ÿ
RĎrdszti,ju
p|R|p1´pq d´2´|R|IpXi;X j |X Rq,
wherep 2 appears since for the termIpXi;X j |X Rqto be non-zero, bothX i andX j must be unmasked. For
iP rds, define
hippq :“
ÿ
RĎrdsztiu
p|R|p1´pq d´1´|R|HpXi |X Rq,
with
dhippq
dp “
ÿ
RĎrdsztiu
”
|R|p|R|´1p1´pq d´1´|R| ´ pd´1´|R|qp |R|p1´pq d´2´|R|
ı
HpXi |X Rq
“
ÿ
j‰i
ÿ
RĎrdszti,ju
p|R|p1´pq d´2´|R|pHpXi |X RYtjuq ´HpX i |X Rqq
“ ´
ÿ
j‰i
ÿ
RĎrdszti,ju
p|R|p1´pq d´2´|R|IpXi;X j |X Rq.
Therefore,
Ippq “
dÿ
i“1
p2
ˆ
´dhippq
dp
˙
.
Sincep“e ´t we have thatdt“ ´ dp
p and we can write
ż 8
0
ÿ
i‰j
IpXi;X j |X Rqdt“
ż 1
0
dÿ
i“1
p
ˆ
´dhippq
dp
˙
dp“
dÿ
i“1
`
´ph ippq
˘ˇˇˇ
1
0
`
ż 1
0
dÿ
i“1
hippqdp.
Observe that
dHpXppqq
dp “
dÿ
i“1
hippq,
49

[PDF page 50]
therefore, ż 1
0
dÿ
i“1
hippqdp“HpXp1qq ´HpXp0qq “Hpx 0q.
Since řd
i“1 hip1q “ řd
i“1 Hpxi
0 |x ´i
0 q, we proved the first part:
ż 8
0
Iptqdt“Hpx 0q ´
dÿ
i“1
Hpxi
0 |x ´i
0 q “Bpq 0q.
We proceed similarly for the total correlation:
ż 8
0
pet ´1q
ÿ
i‰j
Iptqdt“
ż 1
0
p1´pq
dÿ
i“1
ˆ
´dhippq
dp
˙
dp“ ´
˜ dÿ
i“1
p1´pqh ippq
ˇˇˇ
1
0
`
ż 1
0
dÿ
i“1
hippqdp
¸
“
dÿ
i“1
Hpxi
0q ´Hpx 0q “Cpq 0q.
E.2 Proof of Lemma 8
For anyiP rdsandcP rSs, let us define
fi,cpt, xtq :“s T´t pxt ‘i c, xtq.(107)
The following analysis holds for alliP rdsandcP rSs, so we safely omit the indexi, cin the following
analysis, and write it asfpt, xtq.
Consider the case that the backward processtxtutPr0,Ts „ t
Ð
q tutPr0,Ts, which is a Poisson jump process
with generator
Ð
Lt such that
´Ð
Ltf
¯
pt, xq “
ÿ
y:dHpy,xqď1
QT´t py, xqsT´t py, xq
`
fpt, yq ´fpt, xq
˘
“ 1
S
ÿ
y:dHpy,xq“1
sT´t py, xq
`
fpt, yq ´fpt, xq
˘
.
By Itô’s formula for Poisson point process in Lemma 6,fpt, xtqsatisfies the following stochastic differential
equation: for0ďℓďtăT,
fpt, x tq “fpℓ, x ℓq `
ż t
ℓ
”
Btfps, x s´ q `
´Ð
Lsf
¯
ps, xs´ q
ı
ds`M t,(108)
wherex s´ “lim uÑs´ xs, which exists for almost everywheresP r0, Tqunder the Lebesgue measure, since
we have finite number of jumps almost surely. The compensation processtMuuuPrℓ,ts in Eqn. (108) is defined
as
Mu “
ÿ
ys:dHpys,xsq“1
ż u
ℓ
`
fps, y sq ´fps, x sq
˘`
dN xs,ys
s ´λ xs,ys
s ds
˘
,(109)
whereN x,y
s is the counting process of jumps fromxtoyand we write the random counting measure as
dN x,y
s . We defineλ x,y
s “S ´1sT´t py, xqItxs´ “xuto be intensity of the processN x,y
s . Sincex s´ “x s
almost everywheresP p0, Tqdue to the finite number of jumps for each path almost surely, we can rewrite
Eqn. (108) as
fpt, x tq ´fpℓ, x ℓq “
ż t
ℓ
”
Btfps, x sq `
´Ð
Lsf
¯
ps, xsq
ı
ds`M t.(110)
50

[PDF page 51]
To further simplify the right hand side, we assert that
Btfps, x sq `
´Ð
Lsf
¯
ps, xsq “0.(111)
In order to see this, first, recall the definition (107) and direct calculations give
Btfps, x sq `
´Ð
Lsf
¯
ps, xsq
“ B
Bs
ˆ qT´s pxs ‘i cq
qT´s pxsq
˙
` 1
S
ÿ
i1Prds
ÿ
c1PrSs
sT´s pxs ‘i1 c1, xsq
´
sT´s pxs ‘i1 c1 ‘i c, xs ‘i1 c1q ´s T´s pxs ‘i c, xsq
¯
paq
“ 1
S
ÿ
i1Prds
ÿ
c1PrSs
sT´s pxs ‘i c, xsq
´
sT´s pxs ‘i1 c1, xsq ´s T´s pxs ‘i c‘ i1 c1, xs ‘i cq
¯
` 1
S
ÿ
i1Prds
ÿ
c1PrSs
sT´s pxs ‘i1 c1, xsq
´
sT´s pxs ‘i1 c1 ‘i c, xs ‘i1 c1q ´s T´s pxs ‘i c, xsq
¯
“ 1
S
ÿ
i1Prds
ÿ
c1PrSs
´
sT´s pxs ‘i c, xsqsT´s pxs ‘i1 c1, xsq ´s T´s pxs ‘i1 c1, xsqsT´s pxs ‘i c, xsq
¯
` 1
S
ÿ
i1Prds
ÿ
c1PrSs
´
sT´s pxs ‘i1 c1, xsqsT´s pxs ‘i1 c1 ‘i c, xs ‘i1 c1q
´s T´s pxs ‘i c, xsqsT´s pxs ‘i c‘ i1 c1, xs ‘i cq
¯
pbq
“ 1
S
ÿ
i1Prds
ÿ
c1PrSs
´
sT´s pxs ‘i1 c1 ‘i c, xsq ´s T´s pxs ‘i c‘ i1 c1, xsq
¯
,
where in equality (a), we apply the Kolmogorov forward equation onqT´t; in equality (b), we use the fact
thats T´t px, yqsT´t py, zq “s T´t px, zqfor anyx, y, zPX. It is direct to check that the‘operators commute,
i.e., for anyxs PX,
xs ‘i1 c1 ‘i c“x s ‘i c‘ i1 c1.
fori‰i 1, and the relation holds trivially wheni“i1. This relation directly reveals that
Btfps, x sq `
´Ð
Lsf
¯
ps, xsq
“ 1
S
ÿ
i1Prds
ÿ
c1PrSs
´
sT´s pxs ‘i1 c1 ‘i c, xsq ´s T´s pxs ‘i c‘ i1 c1, xsq
¯
“0,
which completes the proof of Eqn. (111).
Takingu“ℓin Eqn. (109), we haveM ℓ “0almost surely, andM u is a local martingale foruP rℓ, tsby
definition. Recalling Lemma 10, we can bound
sup
sPrℓ,ts
sup
xPX
fps, xq ďlogpSq `max
!
log
`
pT´tq ´1˘
,0
)
ă 8.
Similarly, for the intensity of the counting process, it satisfies
sup
sPrℓ,ts
sup
x,yPX
λx,y
s ď 1
S sT´t py, xq ď 1
S
´
logpSq `max
!
log
`
pT´tq ´1˘
,0
)¯
ă 8.
Now it is direct to check that
sup
sPrℓ,ts
Er|Ms|s À pt´ℓqdpS´1q ¨sup
sPrℓ,ts
sup
x,yPX
rfps, xq ¨λ x,y
s s ă 8.
51

[PDF page 52]
As a result, we can concludetMuuuPrℓ,ts isL 1 and hence a martingale. By the definition of the martingale,
we arrive at
EÐ
q t|ℓp¨|xℓqrMts “M ℓ “0.
Returning to Eqn. (110), we obtain
Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq
“
fpt, x tq ´fpℓ, x ℓq
‰
“E xt„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓqrMts “0.(112)
Thus, we conclude that
Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq
”`
sT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt ‘i c, xtq
˘
log psT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq
ı
“E xt„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq
“
fpℓ, x ℓq ´fpt, x tq
‰
¨log psT´ℓ pxℓ ‘i c, xℓq “0,
where we plug in Eqn. (112) in the last line.
E.3 Proof of Lemma 9
The proof of Lemma 9 follows directly from exchanging the order of summation. Specifically, we can write
Ext„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
hps T´t pyt, xtqq
fi
fl
“E xt„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
sT´t pyt, xtqlogps T´t pyt, xtqq ´s T´t pyt, xtq `1
fi
fl
“E xt„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
ˆ qT´t pytq
qT´t pxtq
˙
logpsT´t pyt, xtqq
fi
fl´E xt„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
ˆ qT´t pytq
qT´t pxtq
˙fi
fl`dpS´1q
“
ÿ
xtPrSsd
ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
qT´t pytqlogps T´t pyt, xtqq ´
ÿ
xtPrSsd
ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
qT´t pytq `dpS´1q
paq
“ ´
ÿ
xtPrSsd
ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
qT´t pxtqlogps T´t pyt, xtqq ´
ÿ
ytPrSsd
ÿ
xt:dHpyt,xtq“1
qT´t pytq `dpS´1q
“ ´E xt„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
logpsT´t pyt, xtqq
fi
fl´dpS´1q `dpS´1q
“E xt„
Ð
q t
»
– ÿ
yt:dHpyt,xtq“1
´logps T´t pyt, xtqq
fi
fl,
where in equality (a), we switch the positions ofxt andy t in the summations.
E.4 Proof of Lemma 10
Lemma 10 is a direct consequence of Liang et al. (2025c, Lemma 2). Here, we present a simplified proof
based on Proposition 6. It can be easily checked that
αt “ 1´e ´t
1` pS´1qe ´t P p0,1q.
By Eqn. (59), one has, fordHpx, yq “1,
stpy, xq “ Ex0„q0 αdHpy,x0q
t
Ex0„q0 αdH px,x0q
t
ďα
´sup y,x,x0 |d Hpy,x0q´dHpy,x0q|
t
52

[PDF page 53]
“exp
ˆ
´logpα tq ¨sup
y,x,x0
|d Hpy, x0q ´d Hpy, x0q|
˙
ďexp
ˆ
´logpα tq ¨sup
y,x
dHpy, xq
˙
“exp
`
´logpα tq
˘
.
With similar calculation, one can establish the reversed inequality
stpy, xq ěexp
ˆ
logpαtq ¨sup
y,x
dHpy, xq
˙
“exp
`
logpαtq
˘
.
As a result, we conclude
|log
`
stpy, xq
˘
| ď ´logpα tq ÀlogpSq `max
␣
logpt´1q,0
(
.
E.5 Proof of Lemma 11
Let us start by proving the first equation, i.e.,
φi,cptq “KLpq t } pNi,´cq#qtq.
Recall the definition ofφi,cptqthat
φi,cptq “E xt„qt
„
´log
ˆ qt pNi,cpxtqq
qtpxtq
˙ȷ
“
ÿ
xtPX
qtpxqlog
ˆ qtpxq
qt pNi,cpxtqq
˙
.(113)
As in Eqn. (81), the pushforward measure satisfies
pNi,´cq#qtpxq “q t pNi,cpxqq,for anyxPX.
As such, we can express Eqn. (113) as
φi,cptq “
ÿ
xtPX
qtpxqlog
ˆ qtpxq
pNi,´cq#qtpxtq
˙
“KLpq t } pNi,´cq#qtq,
which proves the first equation.
For the second relation, the definition of KL divergence gives
´ B
Bt KLpqt}p0q “ ´ B
Bt
ÿ
xPrSsd
qtpxqlogpq tpxqq “ ´
ÿ
xPrSsd
dqtpxq
dt
`
logpqtpxqq `1
˘
“ ´
ÿ
xPrSsd
dqtpxq
dt logpqtpxqq.
(114)
Using the Kolmogorov forward equation for the forward noising process, we have
dqtpxq
dt “
ÿ
yPX
Qpx, yqqtpxq “ 1
S
ÿ
y:py,xq“1
qtpyq ´ dpS´1q
S qtpxq.
Plugging the equation above into Eqn. (114), we arrive at
´ B
Bt KLpqt}p0q “ ´
ÿ
xPrSsd
¨
˝ ÿ
y:py,xq“1
ˆ 1
S qtpyq
˙
´ dpS´1q
S qtpxq
˛
‚logpqtpxqq
“ ´ 1
S
ÿ
xPrSsd
ÿ
y:py,xq“1
pqtpyq ´q tpxqqlogpq tpxqq
53

[PDF page 54]
“ ´ 1
S
ÿ
xPrSsd
ÿ
y:py,xq“1
qtpxq
`
logpqtpyqq ´logpq tpxqq
˘
“φptq.
In addition, recallφptq “1{S ř
iPrds
ř
cPrSs φi,cptq. We reach
φptq “ 1
S
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
KLpqt } pNi,´cq#qtq “ 1
S
ÿ
iPrds
ÿ
cPrSs
KLpqt } pNi,cq#qtq.
E.6 Proof of Lemma 12
LetLbe the time-homogeneous infinitesimal generator of the forward process. Since each coordinateiP rdsis
updated independently in the forward process, we can writeL“Li `L ´i, whereL i only updates coordinate
i, andL ´i updates all other coordinates. It direct to show thatLi andL ´i commute, therefore, we have for
anyuě0,
qt`u “q teuLi euL´i ,pN i,´cq#qt`u “ ppN i,´cq#qtqeuLi euL´i ,
where the second equation is due to the operatorNi,´c commutes with the semigroupteuLuuě0. With this
formulation, we reach
φi,cpt`uq “KLpq t`u } pNi,´cq#qt`uq ďKLpq teuLi } ppNi,´cq#qtqeuLi q,(115)
where in the last inequality, we apply the weak data processing inequality for KL divergence. Since both
Ni,´c andL i only operate on the coordinatei, we arrive at the decomposition
KLpqteuLi } ppNi,´cq#qtqeuLi q “E x´i„pqtq´i
“
KL
`
qtp¨|x´iqeuLi } ppNi,´cq#qtp¨|x´iqqeuLi
˘‰
,(116)
wherepq tq´i is the marginal distribution ofqt with coordinateiexcluded. DefineK u to be the transition
kernel onrSs ˆ rSsinduced bye uLi. It is shown that
Kupv1, v2q “
#
1
S ` p1´ 1
S qe´u ifv 1 “v 2;
1
S p1´e ´uqifv 1 ‰v 2.
It can be directly checked thatKu is aS-ary symmetric channel with noise scaleσu “ p1´S ´1qp1´e ´uq.
By Makur and Polyanskiy (2018, Proposition 12), a strong data processing inequality holds for the channel
Ku, i.e., for any distributionp, qsupported onrSs,
KLppeuLi }qe uLi q ďη KLpKuqKLpp}qq,
whereη KLpKuqsatisfies
ηKLpKuq ď
ˇˇˇˇ1´σ u ´ σu
S´1
ˇˇˇˇ “1´ S
S´1 p1´S ´1qp1´e ´uq “e ´u.
Taking this strong data processing inequality with Eqn. (116) yields
KLpqteuLi }ppNi,´cq#qtqeuLi q “E x´i„pqtq´i
“
KLpqtp¨|x´iqeuLi } ppNi,´cq#qtp¨|x´iqqeuLi q
‰
ďE x´i„pqtq´i
“
e´u KLpqtp¨|x´iq } ppNi,´cq#qtp¨|x´iqq
‰
ďe ´u Ex´i„pqtq´i
“
KLpqtp¨|x´iq } ppNi,´cq#qtp¨|x´iqq
‰
“e ´uKLpqt } pNi,´cq#qtq.
Then, by Eqn. (115), we have
φi,cpt`uq ďKLpq teuLi } ppNi,´cq#qtqeuLi q ďe ´uKLpqt } pNi,´cq#qtq “e ´uφi,cptq,
54

[PDF page 55]
which holds for anyuě0. Therefore, the derivative can be bound as
φ1
i,cptq “lim
uÑ0`
φi,cpt`uq ´φ i,cptq
u ďlim
uÑ0`
e´u
u φi,cptq “ ´φ i,cptq,
which induces the target result
´φ1
i,cptq ěφ i,cptq.
E.7 Proof of Lemma 14
The proof follows from (Conforti et al., 2025, Lemma 5.2.2). We add the argument below for completeness.
Let us define
fpt, x tq :“s T´t pxt di c, xtqItiPmpx tqu,
where the dependence oniandcis omitted for simplicity. In view of Lemma 6, for0ďℓďtăT, we can
write
fpt, x tq “fpℓ, x ℓq `
ż t
ℓ
”
Btfps, x sq ` p
Ð
Lsfqps, x sq
ı
ds`M t,
with generatort
Ð
LsusPrℓ,ts as follows
´Ð
Lsf
¯
ps, xq “
ÿ
y‰x
QT´s py, xqsT´s py, xq
`
fps, yq ´fps, xq
˘
“
ÿ
i1Pmpxq
ÿ
c1PrSs
sT´s pxd i1 c1, xq
`
fps, xd i1 c1q ´fps, xq
˘
,
and the compensation processtMuuuPrℓ,ts defined as
Mu “
ż u
ℓ
ÿ
i1Pmpxsq
ÿ
c1PrSs
`
fps, x s di1 c1q ´fps, x sq
˘`
dN xs,xsdi1 c1
s ´λ xs,xsdi1 c1
s ds
˘
.
With similar argument as in the proof of Lemma 8, one hasEÐ
q t|ℓp¨|xℓqrMts “0,which leads to
Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓqrfpt, x tq ´fpℓ, x ℓqs “E xt„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq
„ż t
ℓ
`
Btfps, x sq ` p
Ð
Lsfqps, x sq
˘
ds
ȷ
.
Taking derivative with respect toton both side, we arrive at
d
dt Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓqrfpt, x tqs “E xt„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq
”
Btfpt, x tq ` p
Ð
Ltfqpt, x tq
ı
.
Now let us consider each term on the right hand side above separately. By Proposition 6, it obeys that
sT´t pxt di c, xtq “ 1
eT´t ´1
q0pxt di cq
q0pxtq ,
and we have
B
Bt fpt, x tq “ eT´t
eT´t ´1 fpt, x tq.
Next, direct calculations yield
p
Ð
Ltfqpt, x tq “
ÿ
i1Pmpxtq
ÿ
c1PrSs
sT´t pxt di1 c1, xtq
´
sT´t pxt di cd i1 c1, xt di1 c1qItiPmpx t di1 c1qu
55

[PDF page 56]
´s T´t pxt di c, xtqItiPmpx tqu
¯
“ 1
eT´t ´1 fpt, x tq
¨
˝ ÿ
i1Pmpxtqztiu
ÿ
c1PrSs
q0pxt di cd i1 c1q
q0pxt di cq ´
ÿ
i1Pmpxtq
ÿ
c1PrSs
q0pxt di1 c1q
q0pxtq
˛
‚
“ 1
eT´t ´1 fpt, x tqp|mpxtqztiu| ´ |mpxtq|q “ ´ 1
eT´t ´1 fpt, x tq.
Putting everything together leads to
d
dt Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓqrfpt, x tqs “E xt„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓqrfpt, x tqs,
and therefore,
Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓqrfpt, x tqs “e t´ℓ ¨fpℓ, x ℓq.
Finally, in view of the relationPrpxi
t “MASK|x i
ℓ “MASKq “ 1´eT´t
1´eT´ℓ , we conclude the following
Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq
“
sT´t pxt di c, xtqItiPmpx tqu
‰
“e t´ℓ ¨s T´ℓ pxℓ di c, xℓqItiPmpx ℓqu
“E xt„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq
“
sT´t pxℓ di c, xℓqItiPmpx tqu
‰
,
which completes the proof of the desired result.
F Proofs of the auxiliary lemmas
F.1 Proof of Lemma 2
For a continuous random variableUinRd with density functionpU with respect to Lebesgue measure, define
the differential entropy ofUas
HdiffpUq “ ´
ż
Rd
pU logppU qdx,(117)
where we adopt the convention0 logp0q “0again. By definition of mutual information, we have
IpW;W`ε noiseq “H diffpW`ε noiseq ´H diffpW`ε noise |Wq
paq
“H diffpW`ε noiseq ´E w
“
Hdiffpw`ε noise |W“wq
‰
pbq
“H diffpW`ε noiseq ´E w
“
Hdiffpεnoise |W“wq
‰
pcq
“H diffpW`ε noiseq ´H diffpεnoiseq,(118)
where in (a), we use the chain rule of differential entropy; in (b), we apply the translation invariance property,
i.e.,H diffpUq “H diffpc0 `Uqfor any constantc 0; in (c), we use the condition thatεnoise K KW.
Denote the Gaussian density function with mean0and varianceσ2Id asϕ σp¨q. Sinceε noise „Np0, σ 2Idq,
we can compute with Eqn. (117) that
Hdiffpεnoiseq “ ´
ż
Rd
ϕσpxqlog
`
ϕσpxq
˘
dx
“ ´
ż
Rd
ϕσpxq
ˆ
´ d
2 logp2πσ2q ´ }x}2
2
2σ2
˙
dx
“ d
2 logp2πσ2q ` Er}εnoise}2
2s
2σ2
“ d
2 logp2πeσ2q,(119)
56

[PDF page 57]
where} ¨ } 2 is the Euclidean norm inRd. ForH diffpW`ε noiseq, notice that
Var
“
W`ε noise
‰
“VarrWs `Varrε noises `2 Cov
“
W, εnoise
‰
“VarrWs `σ 2Id.
By Cover (1999, Page 255), for distributions with the same finite variance,Hdiff is maximized at the centered
Gaussian random variable. Therefore, we have
HdiffpW`ε noiseq ďH diff
´
N
`
0,VarrWs `σ 2Id
˘¯
“ d
2 logp2πeq ` 1
2 log
`
det
`
VarrWs `σ 2Id
˘˘
,
wheredetp¨qis the determinant of matrices, and the calculation is the same as in Eqn. (119). SinceVarrWs
is a positive semidefinite matrix, we can apply the matrix inequality that
log
`
det
`
VarrWs `σ 2Id
˘˘
“dlogpσ 2q `log
`
det
`
Id `VarrW{σ 2s
˘˘
ďdlogpσ 2q `Tr
`
VarrW{σ2s
˘
“dlogpσ 2q ` TrpVarrWsq
σ2 ,
which leads to
HdiffpW`ε noiseq ď d
2 logp2πeσ2q ` TrpVarrWsq
2σ2 .(120)
Plugging Eqns. (119) and (120) into Eqn. (118), we conclude that
IpW;W`ε noiseq ď d
2 logp2πeσ2q ` TrpVarrWsq
2σ2 ´ d
2 logp2πeσ2q “ TrpVarrWsq
2σ2 .
F.2 Proof of Lemma 3
ForX„Binpn,1{2q, its pmf is given by
PpX“xq “
ˆn
x
˙ ˆ1
2
˙n
9
ˆn
x
˙
.
Notice that our desired bound is equivalent to the following equation:
ÿ
x:xmod 2“0
ˆn
x
˙
“
ÿ
x:xmod 2“1
ˆn
x
˙
,
which follows from the binomial theorem for0“ p1´1q n.
F.3 Proof of Lemma 13
The CTMC (88) in the lemma statement can be decomposed intodindependent CTMCs for each coordinate.
For coordinatesisuch thatx i
tk ‰MASKclearly neither Eqn. (88) nor Algorithm 1 makes a change. Next,
we fixiPmpx tk q. First, we compute the probability that thei-th coordinate remains masked forytk`1:
Prpyi
tk`1 “MASK|y tk q “exp
¨
˝
ż tk`1
tk
¨
˝´
ÿ
cPrSs
psT´t k pytk di c, ytk q eT´t k ´1
eT´t ´1
˛
‚dt
˛
‚
“expp pQi
kpMASKq∆kq
“P k,
where pQi
kpMASKq,∆ k, andP k are defined in Algorithm 1. Next, forcP rSswe can write
Prpyi
tk`1 “c|x tk q “Prpx i
tk`1 “c|x tk andx i
tk`1 ‰MASKqp1´P kq.
57

[PDF page 58]
Since for anytP rt k, tk`1qthe rates pQtpx, xd i cqare proportional to pQi
kpcq, we get that
Prpyi
tk`1 “c|x tk andy i
tk`1 ‰MASKq “
pQi
kpcqř
bPrSs pQi
kpbq
,
which matches the expression in Algorithm 1. Therefore, the distribution ofytk`1 defined by the CTMC
matches the distribution ofxtk`1 from the algorithm.
F.4 Proof of Lemma 15
In view of the definition ofDp¨,¨q, one can write
sT´t pxt di c, xtqDps T´t pxℓ di c, xℓq, sT´t pxt di c, xtqq
“s T´t pxℓ di c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt di c, xtq `s T´t pxt di c, xtqlog sT´t pxt di c, xtq
sT´t pxℓ di c, xℓq .
The first two terms cancel out in expectation by Lemma 14; i.e., for anycP rSs, one has
Ext„
Ð
q t|ℓp¨|xℓq
” ÿ
iPmpxtq
psT´t pxℓ di c, xℓq ´s T´t pxt di c, xtqq
ı
“0.
Next, using Eqn. (60), we obtain
sT´t pxt di c, xtq
sT´t pxℓ di c, xℓq “ q0pxt di cqq0pxℓq
q0pxtqq0pxℓ di cq .
Using this relation, we further bound
Exℓ,xt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
ÿ
iPmpxtq
ÿ
cPrSs
sT´t pxt di c, xtqlog q0pxt di cqq0pxℓq
q0pxtqq0pxℓ di cq
“E yℓ,yt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
ÿ
iRmpytq
log q0pytqq0pyℓ di MASKq
q0pyt di MASKqq0pyℓ di yi
tq
“
ÿ
iPrds
Eyℓ,yt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
log q0pytqq0pyℓ di MASKq
q0pyt di MASKqq0pyℓ di yi
tq ,(121)
where in the second line, we used the definition of the score function along with the natural bijection
between the setstpx, i, cq, forxPX,iPmpxq, andcP rSsuandtpy, iq, foryPXandiRmpyquto change
the measure under the expectation:
xt Ñy t di MASK
xℓ Ñy ℓ di MASK
xt di cÑy t
xℓ di cÑy ℓ di yi
t.
Note that sincey ℓ appears earlier in the backward process,yi
ℓ can be masked or unmasked. Since thei-th
element ofx ℓ di cis unmasked by construction, we explicitly set thei-th element ofyℓ toy i
t. The third line
follows from the fact that, foriPmpytq, the term is equal to zero.
Next, we define, for fixedt, yt, andiP rds,
fipyq :“log q0pyd i yi
tq
q0pyd i MASKq .
To further control the right hand side of Eqn. (121), we invoke Dynkin’s formula as described in Lemma 6
to obtain
ÿ
iPrds
Eyℓ,yt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
log q0pytqq0pyℓ di MASKq
q0pyt di MASKqq0pyℓ di yi
tq
58

[PDF page 59]
“
ÿ
iPrds
Eyℓ,yt„
Ð
q ℓ,t
rfipytq ´f ipyℓqs
“
ÿ
iPrds
ż t
ℓ
Eyv,yt„
Ð
q v,t
ÿ
jRmpyvqYtiu
log q0pyv di yi
tqq0pyv di MASKd j MASKq
q0pyv di MASKqq0pyv di yi
t dj MASKqdv
piq
“
ÿ
i‰jPrds
ż t
ℓ
Eyv,yt„
Ð
q v,t
log q0pyv di yi
tqq0pyv di MASKd j MASKq
q0pyv di MASKqq0pyv di yi
t dj MASKqdv
piiq
“
ÿ
i‰jPrds
ż t
ℓ
et´vEyv„
Ð
q v
log q0pyvqq0pyv di MASKd j MASKq
q0pyv di MASKqq0pyv dj MASKqdv.(122)
Here for partpiq, as before, we extended the sum tojPmpy vqztiusince additional terms equal zero. As
fipyqonly depends ond´1coordinates ofy(all except thei-th), the constraintj‰iappears. Regarding
partpiiq, it follows from
Prpyi
v ‰MASK|y i
t ‰MASKq “e v´t.
Next, lety ´pi,jq
v denote all unmasked elements ofyv, excepti-th andj-th. We can write
q0pyvqq0pyv di MASKd j MASKq
q0pyv di MASKqq0pyv dj MASKq “ q0pyi
v, yj
v |y ´pi,jq
v q
q0pyiv |y ´pi,jq
v qq0pyj
v |y ´pi,jq
v q
,
and thus,
ÿ
i‰jPrds
ż t
ℓ
et´vEyv„
Ð
q v
log q0pyvqq0pyv di MASKd j MASKq
q0pyv di MASKqq0pyv dj MASKqdv
“
ÿ
i‰j
ż t
ℓ
et´vIpyi
v;y j
v |y ´pi,jq
v qdv
“
ż t
ℓ
et´vIpT´vqdv,(123)
asy v „q T´v. Combining Eqns. (121), (122), and (123) concludes the proof.
59