Qwen
We have a new blog at qwen.ai!
This page will automatically redirect in 5 seconds.
If you are not redirected automatically, please click the button below.
Go Now
Blog
Publication
About
Try Qwen Chat 
Qwickly forging AGI, enhancing intelligence.
Qwen3-Coder: Agentic Coding in the World
GITHUB HUGGING FACE MODELSCOPE DISCORD
Today, we’re announcing Qwen3-Coder, our most agentic code model to date. Qwen3-Coder is available in multiple sizes, but we’re excited to introduce its most powerful variant first: Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct — a 480B-parameter Mixture-of-Experts model with 35B active parameters which supports the context length of 256K tokens natively and 1M tokens with extrapolation methods, offering exceptional performance in both coding and agentic tasks. Qwen3-Coder-480B-A35B-Instruct sets new state-of-the-art results among open models on Agentic Coding, Agentic Browser-Use, and Agentic Tool-Use, comparable to Claude Sonnet 4....
July 22, 2025 · 5 min · 1000 words · Qwen Team
Time to Speak Some Dialects, Qwen-TTS!
API DISCORD
Introduction Here we introduce the latest update of Qwen-TTS (qwen-tts-latest or qwen-tts-2025-05-22) through Qwen API . Trained on a large-scale dataset encompassing over millions of hours of speech, Qwen-TTS achieves human-level naturalness and expressiveness. Notably, Qwen-TTS automatically adjusts prosody, pacing, and emotional inflections in response to the input text. Notably, Qwen-TTS supports the generation of 3 Chinese dialects, including Pekingese, Shanghainese, and Sichuanese.
As of now, Qwen-TTS supports 7 Chinese-English bilingual voices, including Cherry, Ethan, Chelsie, Serena, Dylan (Pekingese), Jada (Shanghainese) and Sunny (Sichuanese)....
June 27, 2025 · 3 min · 537 words · Qwen Team
Qwen VLo: From "Understanding" the World to "Depicting" It
QWEN CHAT DISCORD
Introduction The evolution of multimodal large models is continually pushing the boundaries of what we believe technology can achieve. From the initial QwenVL to the latest Qwen2.5 VL, we have made progress in enhancing the model’s ability to understand image content. Today, we are excited to introduce a new model, Qwen VLo, a unified multimodal understanding and generation model. This newly upgraded model not only “understands” the world but also generates high-quality recreations based on that understanding, truly bridging the gap between perception and creation....
June 26, 2025 · 16 min · 3250 words · Qwen Team
Qwen3 Embedding: Advancing Text Embedding and Reranking Through Foundation Models
GITHUB HUGGING FACE MODELSCOPE DISCORD
We release Qwen3 Embedding series, a new proprietary model of the Qwen model family. These models are specifically designed for text embedding, retrieval, and reranking tasks, built on the Qwen3 foundation model. Leveraging Qwen3’s robust multilingual text understanding capabilities, the series achieves state-of-the-art performance across multiple benchmarks for text embedding and reranking tasks. We have open-sourced this series of text embedding and reranking models under the Apache 2....
June 5, 2025 · 4 min · 798 words · Qwen Team
Qwen3: Think Deeper, Act Faster
QWEN CHAT GitHub Hugging Face ModelScope Kaggle DEMO DISCORD
Introduction Today, we are excited to announce the release of Qwen3, the latest addition to the Qwen family of large language models. Our flagship model, Qwen3-235B-A22B, achieves competitive results in benchmark evaluations of coding, math, general capabilities, etc., when compared to other top-tier models such as DeepSeek-R1, o1, o3-mini, Grok-3, and Gemini-2.5-Pro. Additionally, the small MoE model, Qwen3-30B-A3B, outcompetes QwQ-32B with 10 times of activated parameters, and even a tiny model like Qwen3-4B can rival the performance of Qwen2....
April 29, 2025 · 10 min · 2036 words · Qwen Team« Prev 
Next  »© 2026 Qwen
Powered by
Hugo