From PowerSGD to PowerSGD+: Low-Rank Gradient Compression for Distributed Optimization with Convergence Guarantees
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2509.11254v1 [math.OC] 14 Sep 2025
From PowerSGD to PowerSGD+: Low-Rank Gradient Compression for Distributed Optimization with Convergence Guarantees
Shengping Xie
††thanks: 2300010702@stu.pku.edu.cn
Affiliation: School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
Chuyan Chen
††thanks: chuyanchen@stu.pku.edu.cn
Affiliation: School of Mathematical Sciences, Peking University
Kun Yuan
††thanks: Corresponding author: kunyuan@pku.edu.cn
Affiliation: Center for Machine Learning Research, Peking University
Abstract
Low-rank gradient compression methods, such as PowerSGD, have gained attention in communication-efficient distributed optimization. However, the convergence guarantees of PowerSGD remain unclear, particularly in stochastic settings. In this paper, we show that PowerSGD does not always converge to the optimal solution and provide a clear counterexample to support this finding. To address this, we introduce PowerSGD+, which periodically updates the projection subspace via singular value decomposition, ensuring that it remains aligned with the optimal subspace. We prove that PowerSGD+ converges under standard assumptions and validate its effectiveness through empirical evaluation on large language model tasks.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue" (
) button, located in the page header.
Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.
We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.
About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)
Major funding support from