 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 286 - 300 of 676 publications chip template Remove It's My Data Too: Private ML for Datasets with Multi-User Training Examples Brendan McMahan Fan Wu Arun Ganesh Adam Smith Ryan McKenna ICML 2025 (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract We initiate a study of algorithms for model training with user-level differential privacy (DP), where each example is associated with multiple users, which we call the multi-attribution model. We first provide a carefully chosen definition of user-level DP under the multi-attribution model. Next we study the contribution bounding problem, i.e. the problem of selecting a subset of the dataset for which each user is associated with a limited number of examples. We propose a greedy baseline algorithm for the contribution bounding algorithm. We then study this algorithm for a synthetic logistic regression task and a transformer training task, including studying a number of variants of this baseline algorithm that to optimize the subset chosen in various ways. We find that the baseline algorithm remains competitive with its variants in most settings, and build a better understanding of the practical importance of the bias-variance tradeoff inherent in the contribution bounding problem. View details Governing Innovation: Google's SOX Controls for AI/ML in Financial Systems Eshan Bhatt Glorin Sebastian Ivey Publishing, Ivey Business School, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada (2025) Preview Preview abstract The integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Machine Learning (ML) in financial systems is transforming risk modeling, forecasting, and operational efficiency. However, the adoption of these technologies introduces new risks to financial reporting. This business case outlines how organizations can design and implement SOX-compliant IT controls tailored to AI/ML use cases in Finance, aligning with Internal Control over Financial Reporting (ICFR) requirements and regulatory expectations. View details EQuARX: Efficient Quantized AllReduce in XLA for Distributed Machine Learning Acceleration Ibrahim Ahmed Clemens Schaefer Gil Tabak Denis Vnukov Zenong Zhang Felix Chern Toli Yevtushenko Andy Davis 2025 Preview Unconditional Anonymous Quantum Tokens Dmytro Gavinsky Dar Gilboa Siddharth Jain Dmitri Maslov Jarrod McClean 2025 Preview Preview abstract Protecting user privacy in financial transactions is desirable, yet in the classical world it is effectively impossible without hardware assumptions. Most existing quantum money schemes also fail to guarantee anonymity. We introduce a construction of single-use quantum tokens that give users the ability to detect whether the issuing authority is tracking them, for which we prove unconditional security. Our tokens do not require quantum communication from the users themselves, making them relatively practical to deploy. We discuss potential applications including one-time payment tokens, anonymous one-time pads and voting. View details Unlocking the Power of Google OR-Tools with MathOptInterface.jl Warren Ochibobo Thibaut Cuvelier (2025) Preview Preview abstract JuMP and MathOptInterface.jl give access to many solvers, both very common in the industry and more specialised. Google offers its own in-house solvers as part of the open-source package OR-Tools: Glop, a simplex solver; CP-SAT, an award-winning constraint-programming solver; PDLP, a first-order solver for large-scale linear programming. ORTools.jl is a recent package that gives access to these solvers through MathOptInterface.jl. It supports both local and remote use, meaning that users do not need a local installation to solve linear and integer problems thanks to Google Cloud. More recently, ORTools.jl started offering a native interface for constraint programming building upon the work in MathOptInterface.jl. However, OR-Tools have more than this to offer, including a scalable routing solver for large-scale VRPs or state-of-the-art set-cover solver. MathOptInterface.jl does not yet propose an interface for these problems and we would like to gauge the community’s interest in these specific solvers. View details Iterative Vickrey Auctions via Linear Programming Sébastien Lahaie Benjamin Lubin 2025 Preview Preview abstract Building on the linear programming approach to competitive equilibrium pricing, we develop a general method for constructing iterative auctions that achieve Vickrey-Clarke-Groves (VCG) outcomes. We show how to transform a linear program characterizing competitive equilibrium prices into one that characterizes universal competitive equilibrium (UCE) prices, which elicit precisely the information needed to compute VCG payments. By applying a primal-dual algorithm to these transformed programs, we derive iterative auctions that maintain a single price path, eliminating the overhead and incentive problems associated with multiple price paths used solely for payment calculations. We demonstrate the versatility of our method by developing novel UCE auctions for multi-unit settings and deriving an iterative UCE variant of the Product-Mix auction. The resulting auctions combine the transparency of iterative price discovery with the efficiency and incentive properties of the VCG mechanism. View details Toward Foundation Models for Mobility Enriched Geospatially Embedded Objects Maria Despoina Siampou Shang-Ling Hsu Neha Arora Shushman Choudhury Cyrus Shahabi 2025 Preview Preview abstract Recent advances in large foundation models (FMs) have enabled learning general-purpose representations in natural language, vi- sion, and audio. Yet geospatial artificial intelligence (GeoAI) still lacks widely adopted foundation models that generalize across tasks. We argue that a key bottleneck is the absence of unified, general-purpose, and transferable representations for geospatially embedded objects (GEOs). Such objects include points, polylines, and polygons in geographic space, enriched with semantic context and critical for geospatial reasoning. Much current GeoAI research compares GEOs to tokens in language models, where patterns of human movement and spatiotemporal interactions yield contextual meaning similar to patterns of words in text. However, modeling GEOs introduces challenges fundamentally different from language, including spatial continuity, variable scale and resolution, temporal dynamics, and data sparsity. Moreover, privacy constraints and global variation in mobility further complicates modeling and gen- eralization. This paper formalizes these challenges, identifies key representational gaps, and outlines research directions for build- ing foundation models that learn behavior-informed, transferable representations of GEOs from large-scale human mobility data. View details Can generative models generate novel objects the same as familiar objects? Zhaokun Xue Junfeng He Chang Ye 2025 Preview Preview abstract Text-to-image generative models have demonstrated great performance in generating realistic images. These generations are assumed to reflect a deep understanding of visual scenes. One interesting question is whether these models can possess a zero/few shot generalization capabilities that are known from humans. For example, a human can see an example of a new object and a word associated with this object, use their knowledge in a highly general way to recognize or imagine this novel object in a completely different setting or context. In this work, we are interested in testing whether text-image models can possess this same capability. In this work, we would like to test the hypothesis that text-to-image models may learn familiar objects better than novel objects. We use prompt tuning methods to learn those novel concepts while keeping the text-image models fixed. We prompt tune the model as well to learn familiar concepts, and evaluate the generalization ability for novel objects compared to familiar objects by running generation in different contexts/environments. In addition, instead of initializing the embedding vectors with some similar concepts, we use randomly initialized embedding vectors for both familiar and novel objects. Our human-survey evaluation results demonstrates that in some settings text-image models learn familiar objects better than novel objects. View details PolyPath: Adapting a Large Multimodal Model for Multislide Pathology Report Generation Ellery Wulczyn Lin Yang Shruthi Prabhakara Yun Liu Dave Steiner Shravya Shetty Andrew Sellergren Tiam Jaroensri Faruk Ahmed Daniel Golden Modern Pathology (2025) Preview Preview abstract The interpretation of histopathology cases underlies many important diagnostic and treatment decisions in medicine. Notably, this process typically requires pathologists to integrate and summarize findings across multiple slides per case. Existing vision-language capabilities in computational pathology have so far been largely limited to small regions of interest, larger regions at low magnification, or single whole-slide images (WSIs). This limits interpretation of findings that span multiple high-magnification regions across multiple WSIs. By making use of Gemini 1.5 Flash, a large multimodal model with a 1-million token context window, we demonstrate the ability to generate bottom-line diagnoses from up to 40,000 image patches of size 768 × 768 pixels from multiple WSIs at 10× magnification. This is the equivalent of up to 11 hours of video at 1 fps. Expert pathologist evaluations demonstrate that the generated report text is clinically accurate and equivalent to or preferred over the original reporting for 68% (95% CI, 60%-76%) of multi-slide examples with up to 5 slides. Although performance decreased for examples with ≥6 slides, this study demonstrates the promise of leveraging the long-context capabilities of modern large multimodal models for the uniquely challenging task of medical report generation where each case can contain thousands of image patches. View details Mapping Farmed Landscapes from Remote Sensing Alex Wilson Michelangelo Conserva Charlotte Stanton Vishal Batchu Varun Gulshan CCAI Workshop at NeurIPS (2025) Preview Preview abstract To overcome the critical lack of detailed ecological maps needed for managing agricultural landscapes, we developed Farmscapes: the first large-scale, high-resolution map that identifies ecologically vital rural features, including often overlooked elements like hedgerows and stone walls. We achieved high accuracy in mapping key habitats with a deep learning model trained on aerial imagery and expert annotations. As a result, this work enables data-driven planning for habitat restoration, supports the monitoring of key initiatives like the EU Biodiversity Strategy, and lays a foundation for advanced analysis of landscape connectivity. View details Faster electronic structure quantum simulation by spectrum amplification Guang Hao Low Ryan Babbush Robbie King Alec White Rolando Somma Dominic Berry Qiushi Han Nicholas Rubin Albert Eugene DePrince III arXiv (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract We discover that many interesting electronic structure Hamiltonians have a compact and close-to-frustration-free sum-of-squares representation with a small energy gap. We show that this gap enables spectrum amplification in estimating ground state energies, which improves the cost scaling of previous approaches from the block-encoding normalization factor $\lambda$ to just $\sqrt{\lambda E_{\text{gap}}}$. For any constant-degree polynomial basis of fermionic operators, a sum-of-squares representation with optimal gap can be efficiently computed using semi-definite programming. Although the gap can be made arbitrarily small with an exponential-size basis, we find that the degree-$2$ spin-free basis in combination with approximating two-body interactions by a new Double-Factorized (DF) generalization of Tensor-Hyper-Contraction (THC) gives an excellent balance of gap, $\lambda$, and block-encoding costs. For classically-hard FeMoco complexes -- candidate applications for first useful quantum advantage -- this combination improves the Toffoli gates cost of the first estimates with DF [Phys. Rev. Research 3, 033055] or THC [PRX Quantum 2, 030305] by over two orders of magnitude. https://drive.google.com/file/d/1hw4zFv_X0GeMpE4et6SS9gAUM9My98iJ/view?usp=sharing View details Simulation-Based Inference: A Practical Guide Michael Deistler Jan Boelts Peter Steinbach Guy Moss Thomas Moreau Manuel Gloeckler Pedro L. C. Rodriguez Julia Linhart Janne K. Lappalainen Benjamin Kurt Miller Pedro J. Goncalves Jan-Matthis Lueckmann Cornelius Schröder Jakob H. Macke arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract A central challenge in many areas of science and engineering is to identify model parameters that are consistent with empirical data and prior knowledge. Bayesian inference offers a principled framework for this task, but can be computationally prohibitive when models are defined by stochastic simulators. Simulation-Based Inference (SBI) provides a suite of methods to overcome this limitation and has enabled scientific discoveries in fields such as particle physics, astrophysics and neuroscience. The core idea of SBI is to train neural networks on data generated by a simulator, without requiring access to likelihood evaluations. Once trained, the neural network can rapidly perform inference on empirical observations without requiring additional optimization or simulations. In this tutorial, we provide a practical guide for practitioners aiming to apply SBI methods. We outline a structured SBI workflow and offer practical guidelines and diagnostic tools for every stage of the process--from setting up the simulator and prior, choosing the SBI method and neural network architecture, training the inference model, to validating results and interpreting the inferred parameters. We illustrate these steps through examples from astrophysics, psychophysics, and neuroscience. This tutorial empowers researchers to apply state-of-the-art SBI methods, facilitating efficient parameter inference for scientific discovery. View details Consideration on CMAS arriving as discrete particles Eric H. Jordan Stephen Jordan Hiram Diaz Byung-gun Jun (2025) Preview Preview abstract Turbine contaminants known as CMAS mostly arrive as individual particles in a range of mineral compositions to turbine hot sections where they are deposited and within a small area can be treated as arriving at random locations as splats. By the time the particles reach the hot section the particle size maximum is believed to be 10 microns. Using a simplified heat transfer analysis suggests the arriving temperature will be the turbine inlet temperature. Using AFRL03 as a representative set of possible minerals, for most turbine inlet temperatures a mixture of melted and un-melted particles will arrive. There are 31 combinations of the 5 minerals of AFRL03 presenting a wide range of melting points experimentally investigated in this paper. As expected, combinations generally melt at lower temperatures than the highest melting mineral in each combination. The progression of conditions starting with the arrival of isolated individual minerals is modeled using monte carlo simulations and known materials from percolation theory. This allows understanding of the development of coverage fraction and potential for mineral mixing important to melt behavior as a function of normalized CMAS dose. Using the normalized CMAS dose it is also possible to comment on the likely relative fraction of coating life during which less than fully homogenized CMAS dominates behavior. It is noteworthy that 4 out of 5 minerals and 4 mineral combinations lack either calcium or silicon or both and also melt below 1300°C. Interaction in the early deposition stage involves non CMAS like chemistries. View details A classical quadratic speedup for Planted kXOR Meghal Gupta Noah G. Singer William He Ryan ODonnell (2025) Preview Preview abstract A recent work of Schmidhuber et al. (QIP, SODA, & Phys. Rev. X 2025) exhibited a quantum algorithm for the noisy planted kXOR problem running quartically faster than all known classical algorithms. In this work, we design a new classical algorithm that is quadratically faster than the best previous one, in the case of large constant k. Thus for such k, the quantum advantage of Schmidhuber et al. becomes only quadratic. Our algorithm, which also works in the semirandom case, combines tools from sublinear-time algorithms (essentially, the birthday paradox) and polynomial anticoncentration. View details Transmuting prompts into weights Hanna Mazzawi Benoit Dherin Michael Munn Michael Wunder Xavi Gonzalvo 2025 Preview Preview abstract A growing body of research has demonstrated that the behavior of large language models can be effectively controlled at inference time by directly modifying their internal states, either through vector additions to their activations or through updates to their weight matrices. These techniques, while powerful, are often guided by empirical heuristics, such as deriving ``steering vectors'' from the average activations of contrastive prompts. This work provides a theoretical foundation for these interventions, explaining how they emerge from the fundamental computations of the transformer architecture. Building on the recent finding that a prompt's influence can be mathematically mapped to implicit weight updates Dherin et al. (2025), we generalize this theory to deep, multi-block transformers. We show how the information contained in any chunk of a user prompt is represented and composed internally through virtual weight vectors and virtual weight matrices. We then derive a principled method for condensing this information into token-independent thought vectors and thought matrices. These constructs provide a theoretical explanation for existing vector- and matrix-based model editing techniques and offer a direct, computationally-grounded method for transforming textual input into reusable weight updates. View details 20 21 22 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
