 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 376 - 390 of 676 publications chip template Remove Principled Algorithms for Optimizing Generalized Metrics in Binary Classification Anqi Mao Mehryar Mohri Yutao Zhong Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2025) Preview Preview abstract In applications with significant class imbalance or asymmetric costs, metrics such as the $F_\beta$-measure, AM measure, Jaccard similarity coefficient, and weighted accuracy offer more suitable evaluation criteria than standard binary classification loss. However, optimizing these metrics present significant computational and statistical challenges. Existing approaches often rely on the characterization of the Bayes-optimal classifier, and use threshold-based methods that first estimate class probabilities and then seek an optimal threshold. This leads to algorithms that are not tailored to restricted hypothesis sets and lack finite-sample performance guarantees. In this work, we introduce principled algorithms for optimizing generalized metrics, supported by $H$-consistency and finite-sample generalization bounds. Our approach reformulates metric optimization as a generalized cost-sensitive learning problem, enabling the design of novel surrogate loss functions with provable $H$-consistency guarantees. Leveraging this framework, we develop new algorithms, METRO (*Metric Optimization*), with strong theoretical performance guarantees. We report the results of experiments demonstrating the effectiveness of our methods compared to prior baselines. View details Latent Concept Disentanglement in Transformer-based Language Models Guanzhe Hong Bhavya Vasudeva Vatsal Sharan Cyrus Rashtchian Prabhakar Raghavan Rina Panigrahy 2025 Preview Preview abstract When large language models (LLMs) use in-context learning (ICL) to solve a new task, they must infer latent concepts from demonstration examples. This raises the question of whether and how transformers represent latent structures as part of their computation. Our work experiments with several controlled tasks, studying this question using mechanistic interpretability. First, we show that in transitive reasoning tasks with a latent, discrete concept, the model successfully identifies the latent concept and does step-by-step concept composition. This builds upon prior work that analyzes single-step reasoning. Then, we consider tasks parameterized by a latent numerical concept. We discover low-dimensional subspaces in the model's representation space, where the geometry cleanly reflects the underlying parameterization. Overall, we show that small and large models can indeed disentangle and utilize latent concepts that they learn in-context from a handful of abbreviated demonstrations. View details Syntactic and Semantic Gender Biases in the Language on Children’s Television: Evidence from a Corpus of 98 Shows from 1960 to 2018 Andrea Vial Aida Davani Ruyuan Zuo Shreya Havaldar Morteza Dehghani Andrei Cimpian Psychological Science (2025) Preview Preview abstract Biased media content shapes children’s social concepts and identities. We examined gender bias in a large corpus of scripts from 98 children’s television programs spanning 1960 to 2018 (6,600 episodes, ~2.7 million sentences, ~16 million words). We focused on agency and communion, the fundamental psychological dimensions underlying gender stereotypes. At the syntactic level, words referring to men/boys (vs. women/girls) appear more often in the agent (vs. patient) role. This syntactic bias remained stable between 1960 and 2018. At the semantic level, words referring to men/boys (vs. women/girls) co-occurred more often with words denoting agency. Words denoting communion showed both stereotypical and counterstereotypical associations. Some semantic gender biases have remained unchanged or weakened over time; others have grown. These findings suggest gender stereotypes are built into the core of children’s stories. Whether we are closer to gender equality in children’s media depends on where one looks. View details Advances in QEC Experiments Alexandre Bourassa (2025) Preview Preview abstract Quantum error correction (QEC) is critical for achieving useful quantum computers, since it allows us to combine many noisy physical qubits into one high-quality logical qubit with exponentially decreasing logical error rate. In this talk, we will discuss Google’s latest error correction results [1] where we achieved below threshold surface code performance with logical qubits at distances=(3, 5, 7). In a logical memory demonstration, we show that each increases in distance reduces errorsby a factor of 2.14. Additionally, we report the ability to decode these QEC experiments in real-time for up to 1 million rounds. Finally, we present a 10,000x reduction in the rare correlated errors by measuring the repetition code in the very low error regime. Ultimately, our results show device performance that, if scaled, could realize the operational requirements of large scale fault-tolerant quantum algorithms. [1] Quantum error correction below the surface code threshold, Google Quantum AI, arXiv:2408.13687 (2024) View details Ethical Co-Development of AI Applications with Indigenous Communities Claudio Pinhanez Edem Wornyo 2025 Preview Preview abstract This course explores how researchers and practitioners can engage ethically with Indigenous communities when developing AI- and data-intensive applications. Some key issues such as fair engagement, legal constraints, reciprocity, and informed consent are discussed based on the examples drawn from the instructors’ experience. The course also examines good practices in terms of co-designing and co-development processes, data governance and sovereignty issues and systems, decolonial software licensing, and processes of technology transfer and appropriation. In its practical part, the course critically discusses examples and cases gathered from the audience to explore the diversity of issues and solutions when working with Indigenous communities. View details Position Paper: Graph Learning Loses Relevance Due To Poor Benchmarks Maya Bechler-Speicher Ben Finkelshtein Fabrizio Frasca Luis Müller Jan Tönshoff Antoine Siraudin Viktor Zaverkin Michael Bronstein Mathias Niepert Bryan Perozzi Michael Galkin Christopher Morris 2025 Preview Preview abstract While machine learning on graphs has demonstrated promise in drug design and molecular property prediction, significant benchmarking challenges hinder its further progress and relevance. Current benchmarking practices often lack focus on transformative, real-world applications, favoring narrow domains like two-dimensional molecular graphs over broader, impactful areas such as combinatorial optimization, relational databases, or chip design. Additionally, many benchmark datasets poorly represent the underlying data, leading to inadequate abstractions and misaligned use cases. Fragmented evaluations and an excessive focus on accuracy further exacerbate these issues, incentivizing overfitting rather than fostering generalizable insights. These limitations have prevented the development of truly useful graph foundation models. This position paper calls for a paradigm shift toward more meaningful benchmarks, rigorous evaluation protocols, and stronger collaboration with domain experts to drive impactful and reliable advances in graph learning research, unlocking the potential of graph learning. View details Landscape of Thoughts: Visualizing the Reasoning Process of Large Language Models Zhanke Zhou Xuan Li Zhaocheng Zhu Michael Galkin Xiao Feng Sanmi Koyejo Jian Tang Bo Han Reasoning and Planning for LLMs @ ICLR 2025 Preview Preview abstract Numerous applications of large language models (LLMs) rely on their ability to perform step-by-step reasoning. However, the reasoning behavior of LLMs remains poorly understood, posing challenges to research, development, and safety. To address this gap, we introduce landscape of thoughts-the first visualization tool for users to inspect the reasoning paths of chain-of-thought and its derivatives on any multi-choice dataset. Specifically, we represent the states in a reasoning path as feature vectors that quantify their distances to all answer choices. These features are then visualized in two-dimensional plots using t-SNE. Qualitative analysis shows that the landscape of thoughts effectively distinguishes between strong and weak models, correct and incorrect answers, as well as different reasoning tasks. It also uncovers undesirable reasoning patterns, such as low consistency and high uncertainty. Additionally, users can adapt our tool to a neural model that predicts any property they observe. We showcase this advantage by adapting our tool to a lightweight verifier, which significantly improves reasoning by evaluating the correctness of reasoning paths. View details Fundamental Novel Consistency Theory: H-Consistency Bounds Yutao Zhong Ph.D. Thesis, New York University (2025) Preview Randomized Dimensionality Reduction for Euclidean Maximization and Diversity Measures Rajesh Jayaram Sandeep Silwal Benedikt Kolbe Shay Sapir Jie Gao Erik Waingarten Chris Schwiegelshohn 2025 Preview Preview abstract Randomized dimensionality reduction is a widely-used technique for speeding up large-scale Euclidean optimization problems. In this paper, we study dimension reduction for a variety of maximization problems, including max-matching, max-spanning tree, as well as various measures of computing dataset diversity. For these problems, we show that the effect of dimension reduction is intimately tied to the \emph{doubling dimension} $\lambda_X$ of the underlying dataset $X$---a quantity measuring intrinsic dimensionality of point sets. Specifically, the dimension required is $O(\lambda_X)$, which we also show is necessary for some of these problems. This is in contrast to classical dimension reduction results, whose dependence grow with the dataset size $|X|$. We also provide empirical results validating the quality of solutions found in the projected space, as well as speedups due to dimensionality reduction. View details A Implies B: Circuit Analysis in LLMs for Propositional Logical Reasoning Guanzhe Hong Nishanth Dikkala Enming Luo Cyrus Rashtchian Xin Wang Rina Panigrahy NeurIPS 2025 Preview Preview abstract Due to the size and complexity of modern large language models (LLMs), it has proven challenging to uncover the underlying mechanisms that models use to solve reasoning problems. For instance, is their reasoning for a specific problem localized to certain parts of the network? Do they break down the reasoning problem into modular components that are then executed as sequential steps as we go deeper in the model? To better understand the reasoning capability of LLMs, we study a minimal propositional logic problem that requires combining multiple facts to arrive at a solution. By studying this problem on Mistral and Gemma models, up to 27B parameters, we illuminate the core components the models use to solve such logic problems. From a mechanistic interpretability point of view, we use causal mediation analysis to uncover the pathways and components of the LLMs' reasoning processes. Then, we offer fine-grained insights into the functions of attention heads in different layers. We not only find a sparse circuit that computes the answer, but we decompose it into sub-circuits that have four distinct and modular uses. Finally, we reveal that three distinct models -- Mistral-7B, Gemma-2-9B and Gemma-2-27B -- contain analogous but not identical mechanisms. View details Quantum advantage for learning shallow neural networks with natural data distributions Jarrod McClean Dar Gilboa Laura Lewis ArXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract The application of quantum computers to machine learning tasks is an exciting potential direction to explore in search of quantum advantage. In the absence of large quantum computers to empirically evaluate performance, theoretical frameworks such as the quantum probably approximately correct (PAC) and quantum statistical query (QSQ) models have been proposed to study quantum algorithms for learning classical functions. Despite numerous works investigating quantum advntage in these models, we nevertheless only understand it at two extremes: either exponential quantum advantages for uniform input distributions or no advantage for potentially adversarial distributions. In this work, we study the gap between these two regimes by designing an efficient quantum algorithm for learning periodic neurons in the QSQ model over a broad range of non-uniform distributions, which includes Gaussian, generalized Gaussian, and logistic distributions. To our knowledge, our work is also the first result in quantum learning theory for classical functions that explicitly considers real-valued functions. Recent advances in classical learning theory prove that learning periodic neurons is hard for any classical gradient-based algorithm, giving us an exponential quantum advantage over such algorithms, which are the standard workhorses of machine learning. Moreover, in some parameter regimes, the problem remains hard for classical statistical query algorithms and even general classical algorithms learning under small amounts of noise. View details Differentially Private Insights into AI Use Daogao Liu Edith Cohen Badih Ghazi Peter Kairouz Pritish Kamath Alexander Knop Ravi Kumar Pasin Manurangsi Adam Sealfon Da Yu Chiyuan Zhang Conference on Language Modeling (COLM) 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract We introduce Urania, a novel framework for generating insights about LLM chatbot interactions with rigorous differential privacy (DP) guarantees. The framework employs a private clustering mechanism and innovative keyword extraction methods, including frequency-based, TF-IDF-based, and LLM-guided approaches. By leveraging DP tools such as clustering, partition selection, and histogram-based summarization, Urania provides end-to-end privacy protection. Our evaluation assesses lexical and semantic content preservation, pair similarity, and LLM-based metrics, benchmarking against a non-private method inspired by CLIO (Tamkin et al., 2024). Moreover, we develop a simple empirical privacy evaluation that demonstrates the enhanced robustness of our DP pipeline. The results show the framework’s ability to extract meaningful conversational insights while maintaining stringent user privacy, effectively balancing data utility with privacy preservation. View details Efficient Single-Step Item ID Generation for Large-ScaleLLM-based Recommendation Anushya Subbiah Vikram Aggarwal James Pine Steffen Rendle Krishna Sayana Kun Su 2025 Preview Preview abstract Integrating product catalogs and user behavior into LLMs can enhance recommendations with broad world knowledge, but the scale of real-world item catalogs, often containing millions of discrete item identifiers (Item IDs), poses a significant challenge. This contrasts with the smaller, tokenized text vocabularies typically used in LLMs. The predominant view within the LLM-based recommendation literature is that it is infeasible to treat item ids as a first class citizen in the LLM and instead some sort of tokenization of an item into multiple tokens is required. However, this creates a key practical bottleneck in serving these models for real-time low-latency applications. Our paper challenges this predominant practice and integrates item ids as first class citizens into the LLM. We provide simple, yet highly effective, novel training and inference modifications that enable single-token representations of items and single-step decoding. Our method shows improvements in recommendation quality (Recall and NDCG) over existing techniques on the Amazon shopping datasets while significantly improving inference efficiency by 5x-14x. Our work offers an efficiency perspective distinct from that of other popular approaches within LLM-based recommendation, potentially inspiring further research and opening up a new direction for integrating IDs into LLMs. Our code is available here https://drive.google.com/file/d/1cUMj37rV0Z1bCWMdhQ6i4q4eTRQLURtC/edit View details LightLab: Controlling Light Sources in Images with Diffusion Models Nadav Magar Amir Hertz Eric Tabellion Yael Pritch Knaan Alex Rav Acha Yedid Hoshen Arik Shamir SIGGRAPH Conference Papers '25 (2025) Preview Preview abstract We present a simple, yet effective diffusion-based method for fine-grained, parametric control over light sources in an image. Existing relighting methods either rely on multiple input views to perform inverse rendering at inference time, or fail to provide explicit control over light changes. Our method fine-tunes a diffusion model on a small set of real raw photograph pairs, supplemented by synthetically rendered images at scale, to elicit its photorealistic prior for the relighting task. We leverage the linearity of light to synthesize image pairs depicting controlled light changes of either a target light source or ambient illumination. Using this data and an appropriate fine-tuning scheme, we train a model for precise illumination changes with explicit control over light intensity and color. Lastly, we show how our method can achieve compelling light editing results, and outperforms existing methods based on user preference. View details Bipartite Ranking From Multiple Labels: On Loss Versus Label Aggregation Michal Lukasik Lin Chen Hari Narasimhan Aditya Menon Wittawat Jitkrittum Felix Yu Sashank Reddi Thomas Fu Mohammad "Hossein" Bateni Sanjiv Kumar Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning (2025) Preview Preview abstract Bipartite ranking is a fundamental supervised learning problem, with the goal of learning a ranking over instances with maximal area under the ROC curve (AUC) against a single binary target label. However, one may often observe multiple binary target labels, e.g., from distinct human annotators. How can one synthesize such labels into a single coherent ranking? In this work, we formally analyze two approaches to this problem—loss aggregation and label aggregation—by characterizing their Bayes-optimal solutions. We show that while both approaches can yield Pareto-optimal solutions, loss aggregation can exhibit label dictatorship: one can inadvertently (and undesirably) favor one label over others. This suggests that label aggregation can be preferable to loss aggregation, which we empirically verify. View details 26 27 28 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
