 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 316 - 330 of 676 publications chip template Remove ORTools.jl, a way to access Google's solvers within Julia and JuMP Warren Ochibobo Thibaut Cuvelier 2025 Preview Preview abstract In Julia, JuMP is the go-to modelling package for mathematical optimisation. As of this writing, Google's award-winning solvers have not been accessible through JuMP; which offers Julia's ease of use. ORTools.jl is changing this. Julia users will now have access to Google's Glop, CP-SAT, and PDLP solvers through JuMP as provided by the ORTools.jl package. This talk offers an introduction to the features of the package and an overview of the difficulties we encountered. View details On residual network depth Benoit Dherin Michael Munn 2025 Preview Preview abstract Deep residual architectures, such as ResNet and the Transformer, have enabled models of unprecedented depth, yet a formal understanding of why depth is so effective remains an open question. A popular intuition, following Veit et al. (2016), is that these residual networks behave like ensembles of many shallower models. Our key finding is an explicit analytical formula that verifies this ensemble perspective, proving that increasing network depth is mathematically equivalent to expanding the size of this implicit ensemble. Furthermore, our expansion reveals a hierarchical ensemble structure in which the combinatorial growth of computation paths leads to an explosion in the output signal, explaining the historical necessity of normalization layers in training deep models. This insight offers a first-principles explanation for the historical dependence on normalization layers and sheds new light on a family of successful normalization-free techniques like SkipInit and Fixup. However, while these previous approaches infer scaling factors through optimizer analysis or a heuristic analogy to Batch Normalization, our work offers the first explanation derived directly from the network’s inherent functional structure. Specifically, our Residual Expansion Theorem reveals that scaling each residual module provides a principled solution to taming the combinatorial explosion inherent to these architectures. We further show that this scaling acts as a capacity controls that also implicitly regularizes the model’s complexity. View details Training in reverse: How iteration order influences convergence and stability in deep learning Benoit Dherin Benny Avelin Anders Karlsson Hanna Mazzawi Xavi Gonzalvo Michael Munn 2025 Preview Preview abstract Despite exceptional achievements, training neural networks remains computationally expensive and is often plagued by instabilities that can degrade convergence. While learning rate schedules can help mitigate these issues, finding optimal schedules is time-consuming and resource-intensive. This work explores theoretical issues concerning training stability in the constant-learning-rate (i.e., without schedule) and small-batch-size regime. Surprisingly, we show that the order of gradient updates affects stability and convergence in gradient-based optimizers. We illustrate this new line of thinking using backward-SGD, which processes batch gradient updates like SGD but in reverse order. Our theoretical analysis shows that in contractive regions (e.g., around minima) backward-SGD converges to a point while the standard forward-SGD generally only converges to a distribution. This leads to improved stability and convergence which we demonstrate experimentally. While full backward-SGD is computationally intensive in practice, it highlights opportunities to exploit reverse training dynamics (or more generally alternate iteration orders) to improve training. To our knowledge, this represents a new and unexplored avenue in deep learning optimization. View details Google’s Approach to Protecting Privacy in the Age of AI Kareem Amin Reiner Critides Julien Freudiger Andreas Terzis Royce Wilson Google, , 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA, 94043 (2025) Preview Preview abstract AI products introduce new privacy challenges. Finding the right privacy solution is central to developing innovative products, especially as AI models increasingly handle user data. In this paper, we propose a framework to reason about privacy in AI, and discuss how Privacy Enhancing Technologies (PETs) enable novel user experiences by reducing privacy risks in the AI development lifecycle. We argue that privacy protections are not inherently at odds with utility; in contrast, we discuss how building privacy into products from the start can create better, more trustworthy experiences for everyone. View details Inside-Out: Hidden Factual Knowledge in LLMs Jonathan Herzig Eyal Ben David Eran Ofek Hadas Orgad Zorik Gekhman Idan Szpektor Roi Reichart Yonatan Belinkov 2025 Preview Preview abstract This work presents a framework for assessing whether large language models (LLMs) encode more factual knowledge in their parameters than what they express in their outputs. While a few studies hint at this possibility, none has clearly defined or demonstrated this phenomenon. We first propose a formal definition of knowledge, quantifying it for a given question as the fraction of correct-incorrect answer pairs where the correct one is ranked higher. This gives rise to external and internal knowledge, depending on the information used to score individual answer candidates: either the model’s observable token-level probabilities or its intermediate computations. Hidden knowledge arises when internal knowledge exceeds external knowledge. We then present a case study, applying this framework to three popular open-weights LLMs in a closed-book QA setup. Our results indicate that: (1) LLMs consistently encode more factual knowledge internally than what they express externally, with an average gap of 40%. (2) Surprisingly, some knowledge is so deeply hidden that a model can internally know an answer perfectly, yet fail to generate it even once, despite large-scale repeated sampling of 1,000 answers. This reveals fundamental limitations in the generation capabilities of LLMs, which (3) puts a practical constraint on scaling test-time compute via repeated answer sampling in closed-book QA: significant performance improvements remain inaccessible because some answers are practically never sampled, yet if they were, we would be guaranteed to rank them first. View details Blackboard Multi-Agent Systems for Information Discovery in Data Science Hamid Palangi Hamed Zamani Mihir Parmar Tomas Pfister Yiwen Song ALIREZA SALEMI Palash Goyal Jinsung Yoon 2025 Preview Preview abstract The proliferation of Large Language Models (LLMs) has opened new opportunities in data science, yet their practical deployment is often constrained by the challenge of discovering relevant data within large and heterogeneous data lakes. Existing approaches, including single-agent and master–slave multi-agent systems, struggle with scalability, information heterogeneity, and robustness to irrelevant files. To address these limitations, we propose a novel multi-agent communication paradigm inspired by the blackboard architecture in traditional AI and software design. In this framework, a central agent posts information requests to a shared blackboard, and autonomous subordinate agents---each responsible for a partition of the data lake---volunteer to respond based on their capabilities. This distributed design improves scalability and flexibility by eliminating the need for a central coordinator to have prior knowledge of agent expertise. We evaluate the approach on three benchmarks that require explicit data discovery: KramaBench and modified versions of DS-Bench and DA-Code to incorporate data discovery. Experimental results demonstrate that the blackboard architecture substantially outperforms baselines, including RAG and the master–slave paradigm, achieving 13% to 57% relative improvement in end-to-end task success and up to a 9% relative gain in F1 score for data discovery across both proprietary and open-source LLMs. These findings establish the blackboard paradigm as a scalable and generalizable communication framework for multi-agent data science systems. View details VIDEOPHY-2: A Challenging Action-Centric Physical Commonsense Evaluation in Video Generation Kai-Wei Chang Hritik Bansal Aditya Grover Roman Goldenberg Yonatan Bitton Clark Peng (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large-scale video generative models, capable of creating realistic videos of diverse visual concepts, are strong candidates for general-purpose physical world simulators. However, their adherence to physical commonsense across real-world actions remains unclear (e.g., playing tennis, backflip). Existing benchmarks suffer from limitations such as limited size, lack of human evaluation, sim-to-real gaps, and absence of fine-grained physical rule analysis. To address this, we introduce VideoPhy-2, an action-centric dataset for evaluating physical commonsense in generated videos. We curate 200 diverse actions and detailed prompts for video synthesis from modern generative models. We perform human evaluation that assesses semantic adherence, physical commonsense, and grounding of physical rules in the generated videos. Our findings reveal major shortcomings, with even the best model achieving only 22% joint performance (i.e., high semantic and physical commonsense adherence) on the hard subset of VideoPhy-2. We find that the models particularly struggle with conservation laws like mass and momentum. Finally, we also train VideoPhy-AutoEval, an automatic evaluator for fast, reliable assessment on our dataset. Overall, VideoPhy-2 serves as a rigorous benchmark, exposing critical gaps in video generative models and guiding future research in physically-grounded video generation. The data and code is available at https://videophy2.github.io/ View details The Anatomy of a Personal Health Agent Hamid Palangi John Hernandez Ali Heydari Ahmed Metwally Ken Gu Jiening Zhan Kumar Ayush Hong Yu Akshay Paruchuri Amy Lee Qian He Yun Liu Zhihan Zhang Isaac Galatzer-Levy Xavi Prieto Andrew Barakat Ben Graef Yuzhe Yang Daniel McDuff Brent Winslow Shwetak Patel Girish Narayanswamy Conor Heneghan Max Xu Jacqueline Shreibati Jake Garrison Mark Malhotra Xin Liu Orson Xu Tim Althoff Tony Faranesh Nova Hammerquist Vidya Srinivas arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Health is a fundamental pillar of human wellness, and the rapid advancements in large language models (LLMs) have driven the development of a new generation of health agents. However, the solution to fulfill diverse needs from individuals in daily non-clinical settings is underexplored. In this work, we aim to build a comprehensive personal health assistant that is able to reason about multimodal data from everyday consumer devices and personal health records. To understand end users’ needs when interacting with such an assistant, we conducted an in-depth analysis of query data from users, alongside qualitative insights from users and experts gathered through a user-centered design process. Based on these findings, we identified three major categories of consumer health needs, each of which is supported by a specialist subagent: (1) a data science agent that analyzes both personal and population-level time-series wearable and health record data to provide numerical health insights, (2) a health domain expert agent that integrates users’ health and contextual data to generate accurate, personalized insights based on medical and contextual user knowledge, and (3) a health coach agent that synthesizes data insights, drives multi-turn user interactions and interactive goal setting, guiding users using a specified psychological strategy and tracking users’ progress. Furthermore, we propose and develop a multi-agent framework, Personal Health Insight Agent Team (PHIAT), that enables dynamic, personalized interactions to address individual health needs. To evaluate these individual agents and the multi-agent system, we develop a set of N benchmark tasks and conduct both automated and human evaluations, involving 100’s of hours of evaluation from health experts, and 100’s of hours of evaluation from end-users. Our work establishes a strong foundation towards the vision of a personal health assistant accessible to everyone in the future and represents the most comprehensive evaluation of a consumer AI health agent to date. View details Multi-turn Function-calling via Graph-based Execution and Translation Kai-Wei Chang Hamid Palangi Tomas Pfister Chen-Yu Lee Ke Jiang Yanfei Chen I-Hung Hsu Long Le Zifeng Wang Jindong Gu Jun Yan Fan Yin 2025 Preview Preview abstract We propose a principled method to synthesize high-quality multi-turn function calling trajectories to align large language model (LLM)-based agents. We start with iteratively building function calling graph and defining node operations to increase its complexity. This enables us to construct reliable reference. Then, based on the synthesized function calling graph, we adopt back-and-forth translation to first construct multi-turn user queries and then, fill in the function arguments with information in the query. We sample positive trajectories that distill the function graph reference and negative trajectories that contrast with the positive trajectories in targeted loss patterns in multi-turn scenarios. Training with the positive trajectories with supervised fine-tuning and preference optimization against negative trajectories, we obtain 67.42 on BFCL and 71.7 on ToolQuery with an open-sourced model with 14B parameters, surpassing the performance of strong proprietary models like o1. View details Watch and Learn: Learning to use computers from online videos Hamid Palangi Tomas Pfister Yiwen Song Luke Song Oriana Riva Palash Goyal Yu Su 2025 Preview Preview abstract Computer use agents (CUAs) need to plan long-horizon task workflows grounded in diverse, ever-changing applications and environments, but learning is hindered by the scarcity of large-scale, high-quality training data. Existing datasets are small, domain-specific, and costly to annotate, while current synthetic data generation methods often yield brittle, simplistic, or misaligned task demonstrations. We introduce Watch & Learn (W&L), a framework that transforms human demonstration videos available in the Internet into executable UI trajectories at scale. Inspired by robotics, we train an inverse dynamics model that accurately predicts user actions from consecutive screens, bypassing the need for complex heuristics. To scale to the web, we curate a large state-transition corpus and design a retrieval framework that identifies relevant video tutorials, enabling automatic conversion of raw videos into structured UI trajectories without requiring manual annotations. Beyond training data, we show that the generated UI trajectories can also serve as in-context exemplars, providing CUAs with long-horizon priors and domain-specific knowledge at inference time. On the challenging OSWorld and Mind2Web benchmarks, UI trajectories extracted with W&L consistently improve both general-purpose and state-of-the-art frameworks when used in-context, and delivers stronger gains for open-source models when used in training. These results highlight web-scale human demonstration videos as a practical and scalable foundation for advancing CUAs towards real-world deployment. View details VeriGuard: Enhancing LLM Agent Safety via Verified Code Generation Mirko Montanari Hamid Palangi Lesly Miculicich Mihir Parmar Tomas Pfister Long Le Dj Dvijotham 2025 Preview Preview abstract Artificial intelligence is rapidly evolving, marked by the emergence of Large Language Model (LLM) agents – systems capable of complex reasoning, planning, and interaction with digital and physical environments. These agents, powered by advancements in LLMs, demonstrate remarkable capabilities across diverse domains, including finance, healthcare, web navigation, software development, and daily task assistance. Unlike traditional AI systems, LLM agents can perceive their surroundings, formulate multi-step plans, utilize external tools and APIs, access memory or knowledge bases, and execute actions to achieve specified goals. This ability to act upon the world, however, introduces significant safety and security challenges. The safety paradigms developed for traditional LLMs, primarily focused on mitigating harmful textual outputs (e.g., toxicity, bias), are insufficient for safeguarding LLM agents. Agents interacting with dynamic environments and executing actions present a broader attack surface and new categories of risk. These include performing unsafe operations, violating privacy constraints through improper data handling or access control failures, deviating from user objectives (task misalignment), and susceptibility to novel manipulation techniques like indirect prompt injection and memory poisoning. Ensuring the trustworthy operation of these powerful agents is paramount, especially as they are integrated into high-stakes applications. To address this critical challenge, we introduce VeriGuard, a novel framework designed to enhance the safety and reliability of LLM agents by interactively verifying their policies and the actions. VeriGuard integrates a verification module that intercepts code-based actions proposed by the agent. In the first step, VeriGuard will generates and verifies the policies. The policies are rigorously checked against a set of predefined safety and security specifications Then each action will be verified to make sure it will align with the agent specification. This interactive verification loop ensures that the agent's behavior remains within safe operational bounds, effectively preventing the execution of harmful or unintended operations. By verifying each step, VeriGuard provides a robust safeguard, substantially improving the trustworthiness of LLM agents in complex, real-world environments. View details Small Models, Big Results: Achieving Superior Intent Extraction through Decomposition Danielle Cohen Yoni Halpern Noam Kahlon Joel Oren Omri Berkovitch Sapir Caduri Ido Dagan Tal Efros 2025 Preview Preview abstract Understanding user intents from UI interaction trajectories remains a challenging, yet crucial, frontier in intelligent agent development. While massive, datacenter-based, multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) possess greater capacity to handle the complexities of such sequences, smaller models which can run on-device to provide a privacy-preserving, low-cost, and low-latency user experience, struggle with accurate intent inference. We address these limitations by introducing a novel decomposed approach: first, we perform structured interaction summarization, capturing key information from each user action. Second, we perform intent extraction using a fine-tuned model operating on the aggregated summaries. This method improves intent understanding in resource-constrained models, even surpassing the base performance of large MLLMs. View details HEART: Emotionally-driven test-time scaling of Language Models Hamid Palangi Tomas Pfister Souradip Chakraborty Gabriela Pinto Yiwen Song Palash Goyal Zifeng Wang 2025 Preview Preview abstract Test-time scaling has shown considerable success in improving the performance of language models on complex reasoning tasks without requiring fine-tuning. However, current strategies, such as self-reflection or ensembling, primarily focus on logical or structural refinement. They do not leverage the guiding potential of affective feedback. Inspired by psychological research showing that emotions can modulate cognitive performance, we introduce HEART--a novel framework that uses emotionally-driven prompts for iterative self-correction. HEART provides feedback on a models' incorrect response using a curated set of concise, emotionally charged phrases based on Paul Ekman's six basic emotions. By systematically varying the emotional tone of the feedback across iterations, our method guides the model to escape flawed reasoning paths and explore more promising alternatives. We evaluate our framework on challenging reasoning benchmarks including OlympiadBench, Humanity's Last Exam, and SimpleQA. Across these benchmarks, our approach delivers significantly deeper reasoning which leads to consistent and significant increase in accuracy compared to existing prompting methods. Crucially, these gains are observed across a diverse range of model architectures, demonstrating the broad applicability of our technique. Overall, our findings suggest that the next frontier in machine reasoning may lie not just in refining logic, but also in understanding and leveraging the 'HEART' of the models. View details Judging with Confidence: Calibrating Autoraters to Preference Distributions Hamid Palangi Guowang Li Bo Dai Paul Zhou Emily Xue Yiwen Song Kati Goshvadi Murat Kantarcioglu Dale Schuurmans Palash Goyal Xiaowei Li CHENGYU HUANG Bradley Malin Zhuohang Li 2025 Preview Preview abstract The alignment of language models (LMs) with human values increasingly relies on using other LMs as automated judges, or ``autoraters''. However, their reliability is limited by a foundational issue: they are trained on deterministic preference labels, forcing a single ground truth onto tasks that are often subjective, ambiguous, or nuanced. We argue that a truly reliable autorater must learn to model the full distribution of preference defined by a target population. In this paper, we propose a general framework for calibrating probabilistic autoraters to any given preference distribution. We formalize the problem and present two learning methods tailored to different data conditions: direct supervised fine-tuning for dense, probabilistic labels, and a reinforcement learning approach for sparse, binary labels. Our empirical results show that finetuning autoraters with a distribution-matching objective leads to verbalized probability predictions that are better aligned with the target preference distribution, with improved calibration and significantly lower positional bias, all while preserving performance on objective tasks. View details PLAN-TUNING: Post-Training Language Models to Learn Step-by-Step Planning for Complex Problem Solving Hamid Palangi Mihir Parmar Tomas Pfister Yiwen Song Palash Goyal Chitta Baral Xin Liu Mingyang Ling 2025 Preview Preview abstract Recently, decomposing complex problems into simple subtasks--a crucial part of human-like natural planning--to solve the given problem has significantly boosted the performance of large language models (LLMs). However, leveraging such planning structures during post-training to boost the performance of smaller open-source LLMs remains underexplored. Motivated by this, we introduce Plan-Tuning, a unified post-training framework that (i) distills synthetic task decompositions (termed “planning trajectories”) from large-scale LLMs and (ii) fine-tunes smaller models via supervised and reinforcement-learning objectives designed to mimic these planning processes to improve complex reasoning. On GSM8k and the MATH benchmarks, plan-tuned models outperform strong baselines by an average ~7%. Furthermore, plan-tuned models show better generalization capabilities on out-of-domain datasets, with average ~10% and ~12% performance improvements on OlympiadBench and AIME 2024, respectively. Our detailed analysis demonstrates how planning trajectories improves complex reasoning capabilities, showing that Plan-Tuning is an effective strategy for improving task-specific performance of smaller LLMs. View details 22 23 24 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
