 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 406 - 420 of 676 publications chip template Remove Nearly Tight Regret Bounds for Revenue Maximization in Bilateral Trade Simone di Gregorio Paul Duetting Federico Fusco Chris Schwiegelshohn FOCS 2025 Preview Preview abstract Bilateral trade models the task of intermediating between two strategic agents, a seller and a buyer, willing to trade a good for which they hold private valuations. We study this problem from the perspective of a broker, in a regret minimization framework. At each time step, a new seller and buyer arrive, and the broker has to propose a mechanism that is incentive-compatible and individually rational, with the goal of maximizing profit. We propose a learning algorithm that guarantees a nearly tight regret in the stochastic setting when seller and buyer valuations are drawn i.i.d. from a fixed and possibly correlated unknown distribution. We further show that it is impossible to achieve sublinear regret in the non-stationary scenario where valuations are generated upfront by an adversary. Our ambitious benchmark for these results is the best incentive-compatible and individually rational mechanism. This separates us from previous works on efficiency maximization in bilateral trade, where the benchmark is a single number: the best fixed price in hindsight. A particular challenge we face is that uniform convergence for all mechanisms' profits is impossible. We overcome this difficulty via a careful chaining analysis that proves convergence for a provably near-optimal mechanism at (essentially) optimal rate. We further showcase the broader applicability of our techniques by providing nearly optimal results for the joint ads problem. View details Quantum algorithm for linear matrix equations Rolando Somma Guang Hao Low Dominic Berry Ryan Babbush arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract We describe an efficient quantum algorithm for solving the linear matrix equation AX+XB=C, where A, B, and C are given complex matrices and X is unknown. This is known as the Sylvester equation, a fundamental equation with applications in control theory and physics. Our approach constructs the solution matrix X/x in a block-encoding, where x is a rescaling factor needed for normalization. This allows us to obtain certain properties of the entries of X exponentially faster than would be possible from preparing X as a quantum state. The query and gate complexities of the quantum circuit that implements this block-encoding are almost linear in a condition number that depends on A and B, and depend logarithmically in the dimension and inverse error. We show how our quantum circuits can solve BQP-complete problems efficiently, discuss potential applications and extensions of our approach, its connection to Riccati equation, and comment on open problems. View details Transmuting prompts into weights Hanna Mazzawi Benoit Dherin Michael Munn Michael Wunder Xavi Gonzalvo 2025 Preview Preview abstract A growing body of research has demonstrated that the behavior of large language models can be effectively controlled at inference time by directly modifying their internal states, either through vector additions to their activations or through updates to their weight matrices. These techniques, while powerful, are often guided by empirical heuristics, such as deriving steering vectors from the average activations of contrastive prompts. This work provides a theoretical foundation for these interventions, explaining how they emerge from the fundamental computations of the transformer architecture. Building on the recent finding that a prompt's influence can be mathematically mapped to implicit weight updates (Dherin et al., 2025), we generalize this theory to deep, multi-block transformers. We show how the information contained in any chunk of a user prompt is represented and composed internally through weight vectors and weight matrices. We then derive a principled method for condensing this information into token-independent thought vectors and thought matrices. These constructs provide a theoretical explanation for existing vector- and matrix-based model editing techniques and offer a direct, computationally-grounded method for transmuting textual input into reusable weight updates. View details How to factor 2048 bit RSA integers with less than a million noisy qubits Craig Gidney arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recently, Chevignard et al proposed a way to factor $n$ bit RSA integers using only $(0.5 + \epsilon)n$ logical qubits. In this paper, I streamline Chevignard's algorithm and estimate its physical cost accounting for the overhead of error correction. I reduce its Toffoli count by more than 100x, and show that this implies a 2048 bit RSA integer could be factored in less than a week using less than one million noisy qubits (compared to 20 million in Gidney+Eker{\aa} 2019). I make the same assumptions as in Gidney+Eker{\aa} 2019: a square grid of qubits with nearest neighbor connections, a gate error rate of $0.1\%$, a surface code cycle time of 1 microsecond, and a control system reaction time of $10$ microseconds. View details A Classical-Quantum Adder with Constant Workspace and Linear Gates Craig Gidney arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract In 2004, Cuccaro et al found a quantum-quantum adder with linear gate cost and constant workspace overhead. Since then, it’s been an open question whether classicalquantum adders can achieve the same asymptotic complexity. In this paper, I resolve the issue by constructing an adder that uses 3 clean ancillae and at most 4n−18 Toffoli gates to add a classical offset into a quantum register. View details Training in reverse: How iteration order influences convergence and stability in deep learning Benoit Dherin Benny Avelin Anders Karlsson Hanna Mazzawi Xavi Gonzalvo Michael Munn 2025 Preview Preview abstract Despite exceptional achievements, training neural networks remains computationally expensive and is often plagued by instabilities that can degrade convergence. While learning rate schedules can help mitigate these issues, finding optimal schedules is time-consuming and resource-intensive. This work explores theoretical issues concerning training stability in the constant-learning-rate (i.e., without schedule) and small-batch-size regime. Surprisingly, we show that the order of gradient updates affects stability and convergence in gradient-based optimizers. We illustrate this new line of thinking using backward-SGD, which processes batch gradient updates like SGD but in reverse order. Our theoretical analysis shows that in contractive regions (e.g., around minima) backward-SGD converges to a point while the standard forward-SGD generally only converges to a distribution. This leads to improved stability and convergence which we demonstrate experimentally. While full backward-SGD is computationally intensive in practice, it highlights opportunities to exploit reverse training dynamics (or more generally alternate iteration orders) to improve training. To our knowledge, this represents a new and unexplored avenue in deep learning optimization. View details Better autoregressive regression with LLMs via regression-aware fine-tuning Michal Lukasik Zhao Meng Hari Narasimhan Yin-Wen Chang Aditya Menon Felix Yu Sanjiv Kumar The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations (2025) Preview Preview abstract Decoder-based large language models (LLMs) have proven highly versatile, with remarkable successes even on problems ostensibly removed from traditional language generation. One such example is solving regression problems, where the targets are real numbers rather than textual tokens. A common approach to use LLMs on such problems is to perform fine-tuning based on the cross-entropy loss, and use autoregressive sampling at inference time. Another approach relies on fine-tuning a separate predictive head with a suitable loss such as squared error. While each approach has had success, there has been limited study on principled ways of using decoder LLMs for regression. In this work, we compare different prior works under a unified view, and introduce regression-aware fine-tuning(RAFT), a novel approach based on the Bayes-optimal decision rule. We demonstrate how RAFT improves over established baselines on several benchmarks and model families. View details A unified acoustic-to-speech-to-language embedding space captures the neural basis of natural language processing in everyday conversations Michael Brenner Uri Hasson Samuel A. Nastase Harshvardhan Gazula Aditi Rao Tom Sheffer Werner Doyle Orrin Devinsky aditi singh Adeen Flinker Patricia Dugan Yossi Matias Bobbi Aubrey Sasha Devore Daniel Friedman Leonard Niekerken Catherine Kim Mariano Schain Haocheng Wang Zaid Zada Gina Choe Avinatan Hassidim Nature Human Behaviour (2025) Preview Preview abstract This study introduces a unified computational framework connecting acoustic, speech and word-level linguistic structures to study the neural basis of everyday conversations in the human brain. We used electrocorticography to record neural signals across 100 h of speech production and comprehension as participants engaged in open-ended real-life conversations. We extracted low-level acoustic, mid-level speech and contextual word embeddings from a multimodal speech-to-text model (Whisper). We developed encoding models that linearly map these embeddings onto brain activity during speech production and comprehension. Remarkably, this model accurately predicts neural activity at each level of the language processing hierarchy across hours of new conversations not used in training the model. The internal processing hierarchy in the model is aligned with the cortical hierarchy for speech and language processing, where sensory and motor regions better align with the model’s speech embeddings, and higher-level language areas better align with the model’s language embeddings. The Whisper model captures the temporal sequence of language-to-speech encoding before word articulation (speech production) and speech-to-language encoding post articulation (speech comprehension). The embeddings learned by this model outperform symbolic models in capturing neural activity supporting natural speech and language. These findings support a paradigm shift towards unified computational models that capture the entire processing hierarchy for speech comprehension and production in real-world conversations. View details On residual network depth Benoit Dherin Michael Munn 2025 Preview Preview abstract Deep residual architectures, such as ResNet and the Transformer, have enabled models of unprecedented depth, yet a formal understanding of why depth is so effective remains an open question. A popular intuition, following Veit et al. (2016), is that these residual networks behave like ensembles of many shallower models. Our key finding is an explicit analytical formula that verifies this ensemble perspective, proving that increasing network depth is mathematically equivalent to expanding the size of this implicit ensemble. Furthermore, our expansion reveals a hierarchical ensemble structure in which the combinatorial growth of computation paths leads to an explosion in the output signal, explaining the historical necessity of normalization layers in training deep models. This insight offers a first principles explanation for the historical dependence on normalization layers and sheds new light on a family of successful normalization-free techniques like SkipInit and Fixup. However, while these previous approaches infer scaling factors through optimizer analysis or a heuristic analogy to Batch Normalization, our work offers the first explanation derived directly from the network's inherent functional structure. Specifically, our Residual Expansion Theorem reveals that scaling each residual module provides a principled solution to taming the combinatorial explosion inherent to these architectures. We further show that this scaling acts as a capacity controls that also implicitly regularizes the model's complexity. View details Non-stationary Bandit Convex Optimization: A Comprehensive Study Shirley Liu Dorian Baudry Julian Zimmert Patrick Rebeschini Arya Akhavan 2025 Preview Preview abstract Bandit Convex Optimization is a fundamental class of sequential decision-making problems, where the learner selects actions from a continuous domain and observes a loss (but not its gradient) at only one point per round. We study this problem in non-stationary environments, and aim to minimize the regret under three standard measures of non-stationarity: the number of switches S in the comparator sequence, the total variation Delta of the loss functions, and the path-length P of the comparator sequence. We propose a polynomial-time algorithm, Tilted Exponentially Weighted Average with Sleeping Experts (TEWA-SE), which adapts the sleeping experts framework from online convex optimization to the bandit setting. For strongly convex losses, we prove that TEWA-SE is minimax-optimal with respect to known S and Delta by establishing matching upper and lower bounds. By equipping TEWA-SE with the Bandit-over-Bandit framework, we extend our analysis to environments with unknown non-stationarity measures. For general convex losses, we introduce a second algorithm, clipped Exploration by Optimization (cExO), based on exponential weights over a discretized action space. While not polynomial-time computable, this method achieves minimax-optimal regret with respect to known S and Delta, and improves on the best existing bounds with respect to P. View details Private List Learnability vs. Online List Learnability Hilla Schefler Steve Hanneke Iska Tsubari Shay Moran 2025 Preview Preview abstract This work explores the connection between differential privacy (DP) and online learning in the context of PAC list learning. In this setting, a $k$-list learner outputs a list of $k$ potential predictions for an instance $x$ and incurs a loss if the true label of $x$ is not included in the list. A basic result in the multiclass PAC framework with a finite number of labels states that private learnability is equivalent to online learnability [\citet*{AlonLMM19,BunLM20,JungKT20}]. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that this equivalence does not hold in the context of list learning. Specifically, we prove that, unlike in the multiclass setting, a finite $k$-Littlestone dimension—a variant of the classical Littlestone dimension that characterizes online $k$-list learnability—is not a sufficient condition for DP $k$-list learnability. However, similar to the multiclass case, we prove that it remains a necessary condition. To demonstrate where the equivalence breaks down, we provide an example showing that the class of monotone functions with $k+1$ labels over $\mathbb{N}$ is online $k$-list learnable, but not DP $k$-list learnable. This leads us to introduce a new combinatorial dimension, the \emph{$k$-monotone dimension}, which serves as a generalization of the threshold dimension. Unlike the multiclass setting, where the Littlestone and threshold dimensions are finite together, for $k>1$, the $k$-Littlestone and $k$-monotone dimensions do not exhibit this relationship. We prove that a finite $k$-monotone dimension is another necessary condition for DP $k$-list learnability, alongside finite $k$-Littlestone dimension. Whether the finiteness of both dimensions implies private $k$-list learnability remains an open question. View details Quantum learning advantage on a scalable photonic platform Jens A. H. Nielsen Changhun Oh Senrui Chen Yat Wong Robert Huang Zhenghao Liu Liang Jiang Oscar Cordero John Preskill Axel B. Bregnsbo Romain Jeremie Baptiste Brunel Jonas S. Neergaard-Nielsen Sisi Zhou Emil E. B. Ostergaard Ulrik L. Andersen Science (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent advancements in quantum technologies have opened new horizons for exploring the physical world in ways once deemed impossible. Central to these breakthroughs is the concept of quantum advantage, where quantum systems outperform their classical counterparts in solving specific tasks. While much attention has been devoted to computational speedups, quantum advantage in learning physical systems remains a largely untapped frontier. Here, we present a photonic implementation of a quantum-enhanced protocol for learning the probability distribution of a multimode bosonic displacement channel. By harnessing the unique properties of continuous-variable quantum entanglement, we achieve high-precision reconstruction of the displacement distribution using multiple orders of magnitude fewer experiments compared to methods that do not employ entangled resources. Specifically, with approximately $5$ dB of two-mode squeezing---corresponding to imperfect Einstein--Podolsky--Rosen (EPR) entanglement---we successfully reconstruct a 100-mode bosonic displacement channel, requiring $10^{11}$ fewer experiments than a conventional measurement scheme. Our results demonstrate that even with non-ideal, noisy entanglement, a significant quantum advantage can be realized in continuous-variable quantum systems. This marks an important step towards practical quantum-enhanced learning protocols with implications for quantum metrology, certification and machine learning. View details RefVNLI: Towards Scalable Evaluation of Subject-driven Text-to-image Generation Aviv Slobodkin Hagai Taitelbaum Yonatan Bitton Brian Gordon Michal Sokolik Almog Gueta Royi Rassin Dani Lischinski Idan Szpektor 2025 Preview Preview abstract Subject-driven text-to-image (T2I) generation aims to produce images that align with a given textual description, while preserving the visual identity from a referenced subject image. Despite its broad downstream applicability - ranging from enhanced personalization in image generation to consistent character representation in video rendering - progress in this field is limited by the lack of reliable automatic evaluation. Existing methods either assess only one aspect of the task (i.e., textual alignment or subject preservation), misalign with human judgments, or rely on costly API-based evaluation. To address this gap, we introduce RefVNLI, a cost-effective metric that evaluates both textual alignment and subject preservation in a single run. Trained on a large-scale dataset derived from video-reasoning benchmarks and image perturbations, RefVNLI outperforms or statistically matches existing baselines across multiple benchmarks and subject categories (e.g., Animal, Object), achieving up to 6.4-point gains in textual alignment and 5.9-point gains in subject preservation. View details Privacy-preserved LLM Cascade via CoT-enhanced Policy Learning Xiaozhong Liu Alec Go Kai Zhang Congchao Wang Liqian Peng 2025 Preview Preview abstract Large Language Models (LLMs) have seen increasing attentions in on-device applications due to their exceptional ability in real-world tasks. However, device-end LLM often performs suboptimal due to the hardware limitation. Cascading local (on-device) weaker and server stronger LLMs presents a promising solution to this challenge. While existing research on LLM cascade primarily focuses on optimizing the performance-cost trade-off, privacy concerns remain largely unaddressed. In this work, we prioritize privacy-preserved LLM cascading while enhancing cascade efficiency. To this end, we propose a novel CoT-enhanced policy learning strategy for deferral decision-making, which accounts for both performance-cost trade-offs and privacy considerations. Extensive experiments on three benchmark datasets validate the effectiveness and superiority of our approach. View details VaultGemma Lynn Chua Pasin Manurangsi Prem Eruvbetine Chiyuan Zhang Thomas Mesnard Badih Ghazi Borja De Balle Pigem Daogao Liu Amer Sinha Pritish Kamath Yangsibo Huang Christopher A. Choquette-Choo George Kaissis Tris Warkentin Armand Joulin Ravi Kumar Andreas Terzis Da Yu Zachary Charles Ryan McKenna Ruibo Liu arxiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract In this work, we present VaultGemma 1B, a model based on the Gemma family of models fully trained with differential privacy. VaultGemma 1B is 1 billion parameter pretrained model based on the Gemma 2 series of models and uses the same dataset for training. We will be releasing a tech report and the weights of this model. View details 28 29 30 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
