 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 256 - 270 of 676 publications chip template Remove Infinitely Divisible Noise for Differential Privacy: Nearly Optimal Error in the High 𝜀 Regime Pasin Manurangsi Charlie Harrison FORC (2025) Preview Preview abstract Differential privacy can be achieved in a distributed manner, where multiple parties add independent noise such that their sum protects the overall dataset with differential privacy. A common technique here is for each party to sample their noise from the decomposition of an infinitely divisible distribution. We introduce two novel mechanisms in this setting: 1) the generalized discrete Laplace (GDL) mechanism, whose distribution (which is closed under summation) follows from differences of i.i.d. negative binomial shares, and 2) The multi-scale discrete Laplace (MSDLap) mechanism, which follows the sum of multiple i.i.d. discrete Laplace shares at different scales. The mechanisms can be parameterized to have 𝑂(Δ^3𝑒^{−𝜀}) and 𝑂 (min(Δ^3𝑒^{−𝜀}, Δ^2𝑒^{−2𝜀/3})) MSE, respectively, where the latter bound matches known optimality results. Furthermore, the MSDLap mechanism has the optimal MSE including constants as 𝜀 → ∞. We also show a transformation from the discrete setting to the continuous setting, which allows us to transform both mechanisms to the continuous setting and thereby achieve the optimal 𝑂 (Δ^2𝑒^{−2𝜀/3}) MSE. To our knowledge, these are the first infinitely divisible additive noise mechanisms that achieve order-optimal MSE under pure differential privacy for either the discrete or continuous setting, so our work shows formally there is no separation in utility when query-independent noise adding mechanisms are restricted to infinitely divisible noise. For the continuous setting, our result improves upon Pagh and Stausholm’s Arete distribution which gives an MSE of 𝑂(Δ^2𝑒^{−𝜀/4}) [35]. We apply our results to improve a state of the art multi-message shuffle DP protocol from [3] in the high 𝜀 regime. View details On Fisher Consistency of Surrogate Losses for Optimal Dynamic Treatment Regimes with Multiple Categorical Treatments per Stage Nilanjana Laha Nilson Chapagain Victoria Cicherski Aarón Sonabend arxiv (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Patients with chronic diseases often receive treatments at multiple time points, or stages. Our goal is to learn the optimal dynamic treatment regime (DTR) from longitudinal patient data. When both the number of stages and the number of treatment levels per stage are arbitrary, estimating the optimal DTR reduces to a sequential, weighted, multiclass classification problem (Kosorok and Laber, 2019). In this paper, we aim to solve this classification problem simultaneously across all stages using Fisher consistent surrogate losses. Although computationally feasible Fisher consistent surrogates exist in special cases, e.g., the binary treatment setting, a unified theory of Fisher consistency remains largely unexplored. We establish necessary and sufficient conditions for DTR Fisher consistency within the class of non-negative, stagewise separable surrogate losses. To our knowledge, this is the first result in the DTR literature to provide necessary conditions for Fisher consistency within a non-trivial surrogate class. Furthermore, we show that many convex surrogate losses fail to be Fisher consistent for the DTR classification problem, and we formally establish this inconsistency for smooth, permutation equivariant, and relative-margin-based convex losses. Building on this, we propose SDSS (Simultaneous Direct Search with Surrogates), which uses smooth, non-concave surrogate losses to learn the optimal DTR. We develop a computationally efficient, gradient-based algorithm for SDSS. When the optimization error is small, we establish a sharp upper bound on SDSS's regret decay rate. We evaluate the numerical performance of SDSS through simulations and demonstrate its real-world applicability by estimating optimal fluid resuscitation strategies for severe septic patients using electronic health record data. View details An Inversion Theorem for Buffered Linear Toeplitz (BLT) Matrices and Applications to Streaming Differential Privacy Brendan McMahan Krishna Pillutla Arxiv (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Buffered Linear Toeplitz (BLT) matrices are a family of parameterized lower-triangular matrices that play an important role in streaming differential privacy with correlated noise. Our main result is a BLT inversion theorem: the inverse of a BLT matrix is itself a BLT matrix with different parameters. We also present an efficient and differentiable O(d^3) algorithm to compute the parameters of the inverse BLT matrix, where d is the degree of the original BLT (typically d View details On learnability of distribution classes with adaptive adversaries Tosca Lechner Alex Bie Gautam Kamath ICML 2025 Preview Preview abstract We consider the question of learnability of distribution classes in the presence of adaptive adversaries – that is, adversaries capable of inspecting the whole sample requested by a learner and applying their manipulations before passing it on to the learner. We formulate a general notion of learnability with respect to adaptive adversaries, taking into account the budget of the adversary. We show that learnability with respect to additive adaptive adversaries is a strictly stronger condition than learnability with respect to additive oblivious adversaries. View details Synthetic Text Generation for Training Large Language Models (LLMs) via Gradient Matching Dang Nguyen Zeman Li Mohammad "Hossein" Bateni Vahab Mirrokni Meisam Razaviyayn Baharan Mirzasoleiman International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Synthetic data has the potential to improve the performance, training efficiency, and privacy of real training examples. Nevertheless, existing approaches for synthetic text generation are mostly heuristics and cannot generate human-readable text without compromising the privacy of real data, or provide performance guarantees for training Large Language Models (LLMs). In this work, we propose the first theoretically rigorous approach for generating synthetic human-readable text that provides convergence, performance, and privacy guarantees for fine-tuning LLMs on a target task. To do so, we leverage Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers (ADMM) that iteratively optimizes the embeddings of synthetic examples to match the noisy gradient of the target training or validation data, and maps them to a sequence of text tokens with low perplexity. In doing so, the generated synthetic text guarantees convergence of the model to a close neighborhood of the solution obtained by fine-tuning on real data and preserves their privacy. Experiments on various classification tasks confirm the effectiveness of our proposed approach. Our code is available at https://github.com/BigML-CS-UCLA/GRADMM. View details Improved Lower Bound for Differentially Private Facility Location Pasin Manurangsi Information Processing Letters, 187 (2025) Preview Preview abstract We consider the differentially private (DP) facility location problem in the so called super-set output setting proposed by Gupta et al. [GLM+10]. The current best known expected approximation ratio for an ε-DP algorithm is O(log n / √ε) due to Cohen-Addad et al. [CEF+22] where n denote the size of the metric space, meanwhile the best known lower bound is Ω(1/√ε) [EGLW19]. In this short note, we give a lower bound of Ω(min{log n, √(log n/ε)}) on the expected approximation ratio of any ε-DP algorithm, which is the first evidence that the approximation ratio has to grow with the size of the metric space. View details On Design Principles for Private Adaptive Optimizers Brendan McMahan Abhradeep Guha Thakurta Arun Ganesh Privacy-Preserving Machine Learning Workshop 2025 (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract The spherical noise added to gradients in differentially private (DP) training undermines the performance of adaptive optimizers like AdaGrad and Adam, and hence many recent works have proposed algorithms to address this challenge. However, the empirical results in these works focus on simple tasks and models and the conclusions may not generalize to model training in practice. In this paper we survey several of these variants, and develop better theoretical intuition for them as well as perform empirical studies comparing them. We find that a common intuition of aiming for unbiased estimates of second moments of gradients in adaptive optimizers is misguided, and instead that a simple technique called scale-then-privatize (which does not achieve unbiased second moments) has more desirable theoretical behaviors and outperforms all other variants we study on a small-scale language model training task. We additionally argue that scale-then-privatize causes the noise addition to better match the application of correlated noise mechanisms which are more desirable to use in practice. View details Enhancing XR Auditory Realism via Scene-Aware Multimodal Acoustic Rendering Tianyu Xu Jihan Li Penghe Zu Pranav Sahay Maruchi Kim Jack Obeng-Marnu Farley Miller Xun Qian Katrina Passarella Mahitha Rachumalla Rajeev Nongpiur D Shin Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2025), 1–16 Preview Preview abstract In Extended Reality (XR), rendering sound that accurately simulates real-world acoustics is pivotal in creating lifelike and believable virtual experiences. However, existing XR spatial audio rendering methods often struggle with real-time adaptation to diverse physical scenes, causing a sensory mismatch between visual and auditory cues that disrupts user immersion. To address this, we introduce SAMOSA, a novel on-device system that renders spatially accurate sound by dynamically adapting to its physical environment. SAMOSA leverages a synergistic multimodal scene representation by fusing real-time estimations of room geometry, surface materials, and semantic-driven acoustic context. This rich representation then enables efficient acoustic calibration via scene priors, allowing the system to synthesize a highly realistic Room Impulse Response (RIR). We validate our system through technical evaluation using acoustic metrics for RIR synthesis across various room configurations and sound types, alongside an expert evaluation (N=12). Evaluation results demonstrate SAMOSA’s feasibility and efficacy in enhancing XR auditory realism. View details Synthesizing Privacy-Preserving Text Data via Finetuning without Finetuning Billion-Scale LLMs Bowen Tan Zheng Xu Eric Xing Zhiting Hu Shanshan Wu International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Synthetic data offers a promising path to train models while preserving data privacy. Differentially private (DP) finetuning of large language models (LLMs) as data generator is effective, but is impractical when computation resources are limited. Meanwhile, prompt-based methods such as private evolution depend heavily on the manual prompts, and ineffectively use private information in their iterative data selection process. To overcome these limitations, we propose CTCL (Data Synthesis with ConTrollability and CLustering), a novel framework for generating privacy-preserving synthetic data without extensive prompt engineering or billion-scale LLM finetuning. CTCL pretrains a lightweight 140M conditional generator and a clustering-based topic model on large-scale public data. To further adapt to the private domain, the generator is DP finetuned on private data for fine-grained textual information, while the topic model extracts a DP histogram representing distributional information. The DP generator then samples according to the DP histogram to synthesize a desired number of data examples. Evaluation across five diverse domains demonstrates the effectiveness of our framework, particularly in the strong privacy regime. Systematic ablation validates the design of each framework component and highlights the scalability of our approach. View details DialogLab: Authoring, Simulating, and Testing Dynamic Group Conversations in Hybrid Human-AI Conversations Erzhen Hu Yanhe Chen Mingyi Li Vrushank Phadnis Pingmei Xu Xun Qian Alex Olwal David Kim Seongkook Heo Ruofei Du UIST '25: Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, ACM (2025), 210:1-20 Preview Preview abstract Designing compelling multi-party conversations involving both humans and AI agents presents significant challenges, particularly in balancing scripted structure with emergent, human-like interactions. We introduce DialogLab, a prototyping toolkit for authoring, simulating, and testing hybrid human-AI dialogues. DialogLab provides a unified interface to configure conversational scenes, define agent personas, manage group structures, specify turn-taking rules, and orchestrate transitions between scripted narratives and improvisation. Crucially, DialogLab allows designers to introduce controlled deviations from the script—through configurable agents that emulate human unpredictability—to systematically probe how conversations adapt and recover. DialogLab facilitates rapid iteration and evaluation of complex, dynamic multi-party human-AI dialogues. An evaluation with both end users and domain experts demonstrates that DialogLab supports efficient iteration and structured verification, with applications in training, rehearsal, and research on social dynamics. Our findings show the value of integrating real-time, human-in-the-loop improvisation with structured scripting to support more realistic and adaptable multi-party conversation design. View details The vast world of quantum advantage Robert Huang Jarrod McClean John Preskill Soonwon Choi ArXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract The quest to identify quantum advantages, where quantum physics truly outperforms classical physics, lies at the heart of quantum technology. While quantum devices promise extraordinary capabilities, from exponential computational speedups to unprecedented measurement precision, distinguishing genuine advantages from mere illusions remains a formidable challenge. In this endeavor, quantum theorists are like prophets trying to foretell a future where quantum technologies reign supreme. Yet, the boundary between visionary insight and unfounded fantasy is perilously thin. In this perspective, we explore the properties defining an ideal quantum advantage and examine our mathematical tools for navigating the vast world of quantum advantages across computation, learning, sensing, communication, and beyond. We show that some quantum advantages are inherently unpredictable using classical resources alone, suggesting a landscape far richer than what we can currently foresee. While mathematical rigor remains our indispensable guide in this exploration, the ultimate power of quantum technologies may emerge from the quantum advantages we cannot yet conceive. View details Exploring Optimization Techniques For Finding Contraction Paths Salvatore Mandra (2025) Preview Preview abstract In my talk, I will present a historical overview of the different numerical methods used to find optimal contraction paths. I will introduce TNSA, which has been used for the optimization of the contraction used for [Nature, 634 (8033), 2024], and TNCO, which is an ongoing effort to build upon TNSA. View details Quantum Computing at Google Dvir Kafri (2025) Preview Preview abstract A high level talk about quantum computing at Google. I am giving an invited talk at the Kavli Frontiers of Science. *Please note that I am only using slides that have already been presented publicly by others on the team. All slides have already previously passed review.* View details Non-preemptive Throughput Maximization under Time-varying Capacity Aniket Murhekar Zoya Svitkina Joshua Wang Manish Purohit Erik Vee 2025 Preview Preview abstract We study a variant of the job-shop scheduling problem, where unit-sized jobs must be assigned to a single machine, but the capacity of the machine changes over time. View details Asymptotic Analysis of Weighted Fair Division Pasin Manurangsi Warut Suksompong Tomohiko Yokoyama IJCAI (2025) Preview Preview abstract Several resource allocation settings involve agents with unequal entitlements represented by weights. We analyze weighted fair division from an asymptotic perspective: if m items are divided among n agents whose utilities are independently sampled from a probability distribution, when is it likely that a fair allocation exist? We show that if the ratio between the weights is bounded, a weighted envy-free allocation exists with high probability provided that m = Ω(n log n/ log log n), generalizing a prior unweighted result. For weighted proportionality, we establish a sharp threshold of m = n/(1 − μ) for the transition from non-existence to existence, where μ ∈ (0, 1) denotes the mean of the distribution. In addition, we prove that for two agents, a weighted envy-free (and weighted proportional) allocation is likely to exist if m = ω(√r), where r denotes the ratio between the two weights. View details 18 19 20 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
