 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 166 - 180 of 676 publications chip template Remove Benchmarking and improving algorithms for attributing satellite-observed contrails to flights Aaron Sarna Vincent Rudolf Meijer Rémi Chevallier Allie Duncan Kyle McConnaughay Scott Geraedts Kevin McCloskey Atmospheric Measurement Techniques, 18 (2025), pp. 3495-3532 Preview Preview abstract Condensation trail (contrail) cirrus clouds cause a substantial fraction of aviation's climate impact. One proposed method for the mitigation of this impact involves modifying flight paths to avoid particular regions of the atmosphere that are conducive to the formation of persistent contrails, which can transform into contrail cirrus. Determining the success of such avoidance maneuvers can be achieved by ascertaining which flight formed each nearby contrail observed in satellite imagery. The same process can be used to assess the skill of contrail forecast models. The problem of contrail-to-flight attribution is complicated by several factors, such as the time required for a contrail to become visible in satellite imagery, high air traffic densities, and errors in wind data. Recent work has introduced automated algorithms for solving the attribution problem, but it lacks an evaluation against ground-truth data. In this work, we present a method for producing synthetic contrail detections with predetermined contrail-to-flight attributions that can be used to evaluate – or “benchmark” – and improve such attribution algorithms. The resulting performance metrics can be employed to understand the implications of using these observational data in downstream tasks, such as forecast model evaluation and the analysis of contrail avoidance trials, although the metrics do not directly quantify real-world performance. We also introduce a novel, highly scalable contrail-to-flight attribution algorithm that leverages the characteristic compounding of error induced by simulating contrail advection using numerical weather models. The benchmark shows an improvement of approximately 25 % in precision versus previous contrail-to-flight attribution algorithms, without compromising recall. View details Concerns Beyond the Accuracy of AI Output Kevin Storer DORA, Google (2025) Preview Preview abstract Generative AI's potential for hallucinations and inaccuracies are by far the most discussed limitation in AI-assisted software development. But, whether developers have other concerns about using generative AI in their coding practice has not been thoroughly explored. This article describes the results of in-depth interviews with developers about their other concerns about generative AI in coding, beyond the tools accuracy, and discusses related policy implications for organizations developing software. View details Bridging Continuous and Discrete Optimization in Julia Thibaut Cuvelier (2025) Preview Preview abstract Julia's strength in mathematical computation and high performance makes it a popular choice across scientific fields, mostly due to its focus on mathematics in a broad sense and execution performance. It is a language of choice to implement new numerical algorithms, but it really shines in modelling for optimisation thanks to JuMP.jl and MathOptInterface.jl. These libraries are, first and foremost, made for mathematical optimisation (linear, mixed-integer, conic, etc.), yet they are now generic enough to support more paradigms, such as constraint programming. This talk will introduce the basic principles behind the current implementation of JuMP.jl and explain why and how they are very good matches for modelling using constraint programming… and solving using any kind of mixed-integer-programming solver. Constraint-programming solvers can also be implemented using linear programming, in a great collaboration between discrete and continuous optimisation. This talk will briefly explain the connection and its implementation in Google’s CP-SAT, a leading, award-winning constraint solver that uses linear programs in its solving process — a solver that will soon be available in Julia too. View details Google OR-Tools: solvers for all and now in Julia Warren Ochibobo Thibaut Cuvelier Corentin Le Molgat (2025) Preview Preview abstract Google has a long tradition of open-source software, which encompasses the field of operations research with OR-Tools. In development since 2008, it offers several solvers useful to many OR practitioners: - PDLP, a revolutionary first-order linear solver that is reshaping the landscape of linear optimisation; - CP-SAT, an award-winning constraint-programming solver; - Glop, an accurate linear solver; - Routing, a vehicle routing solver underpinning Google Maps Platform Route Optimization. OR-Tools has long had its features accessible from other languages: the core algorithms are implemented in C++ for performance, but users can tap into them in Python, Java, C#, or Go. It is recently available in Julia too, with a current focus on the linear and constraint solvers, either locally or remotely. We provide a wrapper for our solvers that brings them to JuMP.jl through MathOptInterface.jl. This tutorial will walk you through the features of OR-Tools and its solvers, then show examples of using OR-Tools from within Julia, either through JuMP or a lower-level interface. We will also share our experience of C++-Julia interop. View details Global-to-Local or Local-to-Global? Enhancing Image Retrieval with Efficient Local Search and Effective Global Re-ranking Dror Aiger Bingyi Cao Andre Araujo Kaifeng Chen 2025 Preview Preview abstract The dominant paradigm in image retrieval systems today is to search large databases using global image features, and re-rank those initial results with local image feature matching techniques. This design, dubbed \emph{global-to-local}, stems from the computational cost of local matching approaches, which can only be afforded for a small number of retrieved images. However, emerging efficient local feature search approaches have opened up new possibilities, in particular enabling detailed retrieval at large scale, to find partial matches which are often missed by global feature search. In parallel, global feature-based re-ranking has shown promising results with high computational efficiency. In this work, we leverage these building blocks to introduce a \emph{local-to-global} retrieval paradigm, where efficient local feature search meets effective global feature re-ranking. Critically, we propose a re-ranking method where global features are computed on-the-fly, based on the local feature retrieval similarities. Such re-ranking-only global features, dubbed \emph{similarity embeddings}, leverage multidimensional scaling techniques to create embeddings which respect the local similarities obtained during search, enabling a significant re-ranking boost. Experimentally, we demonstrate unprecedented retrieval performance on the Revisited Oxford and Paris datasets, setting new state-of-the-art results. View details Continuous Evaluation: Using CI Techniques For Experimentation At Scale Nilesh Jagnik IEEE (2025), pp. 157-157 Preview Preview abstract Continuous Integration (CI) is an essential software development practice that establishes processes to minimize bugs and errors in production. In a similar vein, experimentation of software products is vital for evaluating user satisfaction, quality, performance and other key business metrics. Experimentation allows product owners to evaluate the user impact of changes. This can help make informed decisions regarding feature launches. Experimentation also allows developers to tweak internal processes and algorithms to maximize the impact of new features and changes. Additionally, it can sometimes detect errors not detected by CI. Unlike CI systems, experimentation platforms are meant to closely imitate production and usually run the system under test (SUT) against a large scale of input. Despite this, experimentation platforms have a lot in common with CI systems. The mechanisms for continuously integrating and testing changes can be modified and applied to experimentation platforms. Google Search's experimentation platform started as a command line tool many years ago. Over time, this tool has evolved into a platform that serves the evaluation needs for many of Google's products like Search, Assistant, YouTube, Play, Lens, etc., running thousands of large experiments every day. In this workshop, we will present the evolution of Google Search's experimentation platform and how it was transformed from a simple CLI tool into a platform that works at scale, fulfills continuous experimentation needs and provides many CI-like functionalities to its users. Note: This presentation was a part of CCIW workshop a ISCT 2025. Please download slides to see full presentation. View details StreetReaderAI: Making Street View Accessible Using Context-Aware Multimodal AI Jon Froehlich Alex Fiannaca Nimer Jaber Victor Tsaran Shaun Kane Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST'25) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Interactive streetscape mapping tools such as Google Street View (GSV) and Meta Mapillary enable users to virtually navigate and experience real-world environments via immersive 360° imagery but remain fundamentally inaccessible to blind users. We introduce StreetReaderAI, the first-ever accessible street view tool, which combines context-aware, multimodal AI, accessible navigation controls, and conversational speech. With StreetReaderAI, blind users can virtually examine destinations, engage in open-world exploration, or virtually tour any of the over 220 billion images and 100+ countries where GSV is deployed. We iteratively designed StreetReaderAI with a mixed-visual ability team and performed an evaluation with eleven blind users. Our findings demonstrate the value of an accessible street view in supporting POI investigations and remote route planning. We close by enumerating key guidelines for future work. View details Quantum Algorithms for Linear Matrix Equations Rolando Somma Guang Hao Low Dominic Berry Ryan Babbush arXiv:2508.02822 (2025) Preview Preview abstract We describe an efficient quantum algorithm for solving the linear matrix equation AX+XB=C, where A, B and C are given complex matrices and X is unknown. This is known as the Sylvester equation, a fundamental equation with applications in control theory and physics. Rather than encoding the solution in a quantum state in a fashion analogous to prior quantum linear algebra solvers, our approach constructs the solution matrix X in a block-encoding, rescaled by some factor. This allows us to obtain certain properties of the entries of X exponentially faster than would be possible from preparing X as a quantum state. The query and gate complexities of the quantum circuit that implements this block-encoding are almost linear in a condition number that depends on A and B, and depend logarithmically in the dimension and inverse error. We show how our quantum circuits can solve BQP-complete problems efficiently, discuss potential applications and extensions of our approach, its connection to Riccati equation, and comment on open problems. View details Matryoshka Model Learning for Improved Elastic Student Models Cho-Jui Hsieh Prateek Jain Chetan Verma Aditya Srinivas Timmaraju Suyash Damle Inderjit Dhillon Xin Liu Wen Chen Ngot Bui Yang Zhang 2025 Preview Preview abstract Production machine learning models in the industry are often devel-oped with a primary focus on maximizing model quality. However,these models must ultimately operate within the resource con-straints of their serving infrastructure, including limitations on com-pute, memory and bandwidth. The rapid evolution of serving hard-ware, particularly with advancements in accelerator technology,necessitates periodic retraining to leverage newer, more efficientinfrastructure. This cyclical retraining process is resource-intensive,demanding significant model development time and incurring sub-stantial training costs. This challenge is further amplified by thetrend towards increasingly complex models, which inherently re-quire greater computational resources for training and deployment.While prior work has explored techniques like supernet sub-modelextraction to address training efficiency, a critical gap remains: theefficient generation of a spectrum of high-quality models froman existing production model, a common requirement in diverseindustrial applications. To bridge this gap, we introduce a novel ap-proach leveraging a "Teaching Assistant" (TA) model, derived froma given production model (referred to as the Student model). Wedemonstrate that through co-training the Student and TA modelswith Matryoshka structure while using online distillation, we notonly enhance the Student model’s performance but also enable theflexible creation of a model family offering a compelling trade-offbetween model quality and model size. View details Shield Up: Inoculating Users Against Online Scams Using A Game Based Approach Abhishek Roy Sujata Mukherjee Narsi G (2025) Preview Preview abstract Online scams are a growing threat in India, impacting millions and causing substantial financial losses year over year. This white paper presents ShieldUp!, a novel mobile game prototype designed to inoculate users against common online scams by leveraging the principles of psychological inoculation theory. ShieldUp! exposes users to weakened versions of manipulation tactics frequently used by scammers, and teaches them to recognize and pre-emptively refute these techniques. A randomized controlled trial (RCT) with 3,000 participants in India was conducted to evaluate the game's efficacy in helping users better identify scams scenarios. Participants were assigned to one of three groups: the ShieldUp! group (play time: 15 min), a general scam awareness group (watching videos and reading tips for 10-15 min), and a control group (plays "Chrome Dino", an unrelated game, for 10 minutes). Scam discernment ability was measured using a newly developed Scam Discernment Ability Test (SDAT-10) before the intervention, immediately after, and at a 21-day follow-up. Results indicated that participants who played ShieldUp! showed a significant improvement in their ability to identify scams compared to both control groups, and this improvement was maintained at follow-up. Importantly, while both interventions initially led users to to show increased skepticism towards even genuine online offers (NOT Scam scenarios), this effect dissipated after 21 days, suggesting no long-term negative impact on user trust. This study demonstrates the potential of game-based inoculation as a scalable and effective scam prevention strategy, offering valuable insights for product design, policy interventions, and future research, including the need for longitudinal studies and cross-cultural adaptations. View details "Accessibility people, you go work on that thing of yours over there": Addressing Disability Inclusion in AI Product Organizations Sanika Moharana Cindy Bennett Erin Buehler Michael Madaio Vinita Tibdewal Shaun Kane Proceedings of AIES 2025 (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract The rapid emergence of generative AI models and AI powered systems has surfaced a variety of concerns around responsibility, safety, and inclusion. Some of these concerns address specific vulnerable communities, including people with disabilities. At the same time, these systems may introduce harms upon disabled users that do not fit neatly into existing accessibility classifications, and may not be addressed by current accessibility practices. In this paper, we investigate how stakeholders across a variety of job types are encountering and addressing potentially negative impacts of AI on users with disabilities. Through interviews with 25 practitioners, we identify emerging challenges related to AI’s impact on disabled users, systemic obstacles that contribute to problems, and effective strategies for impacting change. Based on these findings, we offer suggestions for improving existing processes for creating AI-powered systems and supporting practitioners in developing skills to address these emerging challenges. View details CountQA: How Well Do MLLMs Count in the Wild? Jayant Tamarapalli Rynaa Grover Nilay Pande Sahiti Yerramilli arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.06585 (2025) Preview Preview abstract While Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) display a remarkable fluency in describing visual scenes, their ability to perform the fundamental task of object counting remains poorly understood. This paper confronts this issue by introducing CountQA, a challenging new benchmark composed of over 1,500 question-answer pairs centered on images of everyday, real-world objects, often in cluttered and occluded arrangements. Our evaluation of 15 prominent MLLMs on CountQA systematically investigates this weakness, revealing a critical failure of numerical grounding: the models consistently struggle to translate raw visual information into an accurate quantity. By providing a dedicated tool to probe this foundational weakness, CountQA paves the way for the development of more robust and truly capable MLLMs that are spatially aware and numerically grounded. View details IM-DD vs. Coherent in Datacenters: A Revisit in 2025 Xiang Zhou 2025 Preview Preview abstract This tutorial examines the progress and scaling limitations of IM-DD based optical technologies and explores how datacenter use cases optimized coherent technology, including a newly proposed polarization-folding, time-diversity approach and a novel single-sideband coherent detection technology—can address some of these challenges View details Generating Dialogues from Egocentric Instructional Videos for Task Assistance: Dataset, Method and Benchmark Lavisha Aggarwal Vikas Bahirwani Lin Li Andrea Colaco 2025 Preview Preview abstract Many everyday tasks ranging from fixing appliances, cooking recipes to car maintenance require expert knowledge, especially when tasks are complex and multi-step. Despite growing interest in AI agents, there is a scarcity of dialogue-video datasets grounded for real world task assistance. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective approach that transforms single-person instructional videos into task-guidance two-person dialogues, aligned with fine grained steps and video-clips. Our fully automatic approach, powered by large language models, offers an efficient alternative to the substantial cost and effort required for manual data collection. Using this technique, we build HowToDIV, a large-scale dataset containing 507 conversations, 6636 question-answer pairs and 24 hours of videoclips across diverse tasks in cooking, mechanics, and planting. Each session includes multi-turn conversation where an expert teaches a novice user how to perform a task step by step, while observing user's surrounding through a camera and microphone equipped wearable device. We establish the baseline benchmark performance on HowToDIV dataset through Gemma-3 model, for future research on this new task of dialogues for procedural-task assistance. Our dataset and code are publicly available at our project page: https://github.com/google/howtodiv. View details DORA Impact of Generative AI in Software Development Derek DeBellis Kevin Storer Daniella Villalba Nathen Harvey Sarah D'Angelo Adam Brown DORA, Google (2025) Preview Preview abstract Generative AI is transforming how software is built, offering unprecedented opportunities and raising new challenges. Based on extensive research and developer interviews, this DORA report provides a nuanced understanding of AI's impact on individuals, teams, and organizations. View details 12 13 14 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
