 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 661 - 675 of 676 publications chip template Remove MesaNet: Sequence Modelling by Locally Optimal test-Time Training Nino Scherrer Songlin Yang Blaise Aguera-Arcas Razvan Pascanu Alexander Meulemans Seijin Kobayashi Yanick Schimpf Kaitlin Maile João Sacramento Maximilian Schlegel Luca Versari Oliver Sieberling Johannes von Oswald Rif A. Saurous 2025 Preview Preview abstract Sequence modeling is currently dominated by causal transformer architectures that use softmax self-attention. Although widely adopted, transformers require scaling memory and compute linearly during inference. A recent stream of work linearized the softmax operation, resulting in powerful recurrent neural network (RNN) models with constant memory and compute costs such as DeltaNet, Mamba or xLSTM. These models can be unified by noting that their recurrent layer dynamics can all be derived from an in-context regression objective, approximately optimized through an online learning rule. Here, we join this line of work and introduce a numerically stable, chunkwise parallelizable version of the recently proposed Mesa layer (von Oswald et al., 2024), which could only run sequentially in time and was therefore not scalable. This layer again stems from an in-context loss, but which is now minimized to optimality at every time point using a fast conjugate gradient solver. Through an extensive suite of experiments study up to the billion-parameter scale, we show that optimal test-time training enables reaching lower language modeling perplexity and higher downstream benchmark performance than previous RNNs, especially on tasks requiring long context understanding. This performance gain comes at the cost of additional flops spent during inference time. Our results are therefore intriguingly related to recent trends of increasing test-time compute to improve performance – here by spending compute to solve sequential optimization problems within the neural network itself. View details Scaffolding for Success: Blending Learning With and About Generative AI in Medical Education Magnus Boman Paul Jhun Mike Schaekermann Medical Teacher, 47 (2025) Preview Preview abstract The emergence of Generative AI (GenAI) presents both vast opportunities and profound challenges for medical education. To ensure its effective and ethically sound adoption, educators, institutions, and policy-makers must look beyond efficiency gains to foster deeper, resilient learning catalyzed by productive struggle: deliberate engagement with complex issues that promotes critical thinking. We conducted a conceptual analysis exploring two intertwined dimensions: using GenAI as a pedagogical tool (‘AI in Education’) and teaching foundational understanding of AI itself (‘Education in AI’). We mapped GenAI’s affordances—expressivity, interactivity, multimodality—to educational experiences such as interactive tutoring, OSCE feedback, and simulated patient interactions. We then critically examined implications for curriculum design and learner competencies. We found that GenAI’s simultaneous increase in helpfulness and complexity forces convergence of the two educational dimensions. While GenAI supports enhanced learning (e.g. multi-turn tutoring), meaningful use demands critical awareness of its operational limits, ethical boundaries, and technical mechanisms. We argue that mere use of GenAI is insufficient; effective engagement must be informed, reflective, and critical. This entanglement necessitates reimagined curricula and competencies to prepare adaptive, ethically grounded clinicians. Embracing the tension between using and understanding GenAI supports development of robust clinical reasoning in an AI-augmented healthcare landscape. View details Speculative Testing at Google with Transition Prediction Tim Henderson Sushmita Azad Avi Kondareddy Abhay Singh 2025 Preview Preview abstract Google's approach to testing includes both testing prior to code submission (for fast validation) and after code submission (for comprehensive validation). However, Google's ever growing testing demand has lead to increased continuous integration cycle latency and machine costs. When the post code submission continuous integration cycles get longer it delays detecting breakages in the main repository which increases developer friction and lowers productivity. To mitigate this without increasing resource demand, Google is implementing Postsubmit Speculative Cycles in their Test Automation Platform (TAP). Speculative Cycles prioritize finding novel breakages faster. In this paper we present our new test scheduling architecture and the machine learning system (Transition Prediction) driving it. Both the ML system and the end-to-end test scheduling system are empirically evaluated on 3-months of our production data (120 billion test X cycle pairs, 7.7 million breaking targets, with ~20 thousand unique breakages). Using Speculative Cycles we observed a median (p50) reduction of approximately 70 minutes in the time taken to detect novel breaking targets. View details Multiarch Testing at Google Tim Henderson Sushmita Azad Avi Kondareddy Abhay Singh (2025) Preview Preview abstract With the end of Moore's law, the need for higher performance per watt, and the rise of domain specific chips Google is adopting new general purpose compute architectures. Google now routinely runs large scale software (Big Query, Spanner, PubSub, Blobstore, etc…) on both x86 and Arm CPUs. Previously most server software at Google was written for the x86-64 architecture. When adopting a new architecture the software needs to be verified for the new platform. In this talk we will discuss how we are changing our central continuous integration platforms to support multi-architecture testing. Our primary thesis for our changes is that most bugs are not architecture specific. Most software runs well regardless of the platform. However, occasionally there are platform specific issues that need to be detected and fixed. If we naively run tests on every available platform our testing cost would scale linearly with the number of available platforms. This cost increase (double compute cost to introduce Arm) is too high and running every test twice is wasteful given that most bugs are not architecture dependent. Therefore, we must take a pragmatic approach and use historical data to guide our testing efforts. In addition to the machine cost of running the tests, introducing a new architecture also introduces a human cost. Every team that uses CI at Google (virtually all software teams) has one or more "projects" that they have configured with a bespoke configuration format. As part of the format they specify which flags (options) they would like to pass to the build system (Bazel). Bazel then uses these high level flags to configure the individual build tools like compilers and linkers that convert the high level programs to machine code. With no changes our largest CI system, TAP, trivially supports Arm or any other architecture — just supply the relevant feature flags in each project's configuration file. However, TAP has hundreds of thousands of projects. Requiring manual reconfiguration and duplication of those projects to migrate to Arm would be incredibly costly in human time. To make sure introducing a new architecture scales "sublinearly" in human time as well we introduced an automated configuration method: "variants." Variants automate CI to centralize build option configuration. This is accomplished using a structured, machine-understandable format, enabling CI systems to intelligently and cost-effectively schedule per-architecture testing. This presentation will focus on how this configuration automation facilitates intelligent, machine-learning-driven scheduling, creating a user experience where architectural diversity is transparent unless significant failures occur. View details SecRepoBench: Benchmarking Code Agents for Secure Code Completion in Real-World Repositories Chihao Shen Connor Dilgren Purva Chiniya Luke Griffith Yu Ding Yizheng Chen 2025 Preview Preview abstract This paper introduces SecRepoBench, a benchmark to evaluate code agents on secure code completion in real-world repositories. SecRepoBench has 318 code completion tasks in 27 C/C++ repositories, covering 15 CWEs. We evaluate 29 standalone LLMs and 15 code agents across 3 state-of-the-art agent frameworks using our benchmark. We find that state-of-the-art LLMs struggle with generating correct and secure code completions. However, code agents significantly outperform standalone LLMs. We show that SecRepoBench is more difficult than the prior state-of-the-art benchmark. Finally, our comprehensive analysis provides insights into potential directions for enhancing the ability of code agents to write correct and secure code in real-world repositories. View details The Emerging Paradigm of Geospatial Foundation Models: From Pre-Training to Agentic Reasoning Shelley Cazares Sprinter (2025), pp. 1-17 Preview Preview abstract The analysis of satellite and aerial imagery has entered a new era with the advent of foundation models. This paper describes the concept of Geospatial Foundation Models (GeoFMs), which are artificial intelligence/machine learning (AI/ML) models pre-trained on massive geospatial datasets through varied methodologies. We first articulate the core paradigm shift that GeoFMs enable: a separation of duties, where large-scale model providers perform the computationally intensive pre-training, allowing domain experts to rapidly fine-tune or prompt these models for specific, mission-critical tasks. This approach democratizes access to state-of-the-art AI/ML. We then explore the novel capabilities unlocked by different types of GeoFMs, distinguishing between the fine-tunable vision models produced by self-supervised techniques like Masked Auto-Encoding, and the vision-language models produced by contrastive learning which enable zero-shot tasks like open-vocabulary image analysis. Next, we discuss the practical considerations for operationalizing GeoFMs, from performance-cost analysis to the broader MLOps ecosystem. To that end, we introduce a taxonomy of model adaptation strategies and propose a framework for domain experts to select the most cost-effective adaptation approach for their particular mission set. Finally, we present a forward-looking vision of Agentic Geospatial Reasoning, where Large Language Models act as intelligent orchestrators, leveraging GeoFMs as tools to answer high-level user queries in natural language and automate complex analytical workflows, moving the field from perception to cognition. View details A connectomic resource for neural cataloguing and circuit dissection of the larval zebrafish brain Mariela Petkova Michał Januszewski Tim Blakely Kristian J. Herrera Gregor Schuhknecht Robert Tiller Jinhan Choi Richard L. Schalek Jonathan Boulanger-Weill Adi Peleg Yuelong Wu Shuohong Wang Jakob Troidl Submit Kumar Vohra Donglai Wei Stuart Berg Christopher Knecht Geoffrey W Meissner Wyatt Korff Misha Ahrens Viren Jain Jeff W. Lichtman Florian Engert bioRxiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract We present a correlated light and electron microscopy (CLEM) dataset from a 7-day-old larval zebrafish, integrating confocal imaging of genetically labeled excitatory (vglut2a) and inhibitory (gad1b) neurons with nanometer-resolution serial section EM. The dataset spans the brain and anterior spinal cord, capturing >180,000 segmented soma, >40,000 molecularly annotated neurons, and 30 million synapses, most of which were classified as excitatory, inhibitory, or modulatory. To characterize the directional flow of activity across the brain, we leverage the synaptic and cell body annotations to compute region-wise input and output drive indices at single cell resolution. We illustrate the dataset’s utility by dissecting and validating circuits in three distinct systems: water flow direction encoding in the lateral line, recurrent excitation and contralateral inhibition in a hindbrain motion integrator, and functionally relevant targeted long-range projections from a tegmental excitatory nucleus, demonstrating that this resource enables rigorous hypothesis testing as well as exploratory-driven circuit analysis. The dataset is integrated into an open-access platform optimized to facilitate community reconstruction and discovery efforts throughout the larval zebrafish brain. (Full author list included with the paper.) View details LawInstruct: A Resource for Studying Language Model Adaptation to the Legal Domain Joel Niklaus Lucia Zheng Arya McCarthy Christopher Hahn Brian Rosen Peter Henderson Daniel E. Ho Garrett Honke Percy Liang Chris Manning Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025, Association for Computational Linguistics, Albuquerque, New Mexico, pp. 127-152 Preview Preview abstract Instruction tuning is an important step in making language models useful for direct user interaction. However, the legal domain is underrepresented in typical instruction datasets (e.g., only 10 out of 1600+ tasks in Super-NaturalInstructions). To study whether instruction tuning on legal datasets is necessary for strong legal reasoning, we aggregate 58 annotated legal datasets and write instructions for each, creating LawInstruct. LawInstruct covers 17 global jurisdictions, 24 languages and a total of 12M examples across diverse tasks such as legal QA, summarization of court cases, and legal argument mining. We evaluate our models on LegalBench, measuring legal reasoning across five categories in 162 challenging and realistic legal tasks, and MMLU, to measure potential drops in general reasoning capabilities. We find that legal-specific instruction tuning on Flan-T5 – yielding FLawN-T5 – improves performance on LegalBench across all model sizes, with an aggregate increase of 15 points or 50% over Flan-T5 for the base size. No model size shows performance drops in MMLU. We publish LawInstruct as a resource for further study of instruction tuning in the legal domain. View details Towards Equitable Community-Industry Collaborations: Understanding the Experiences of Nonprofits' Collaborations with Tech Companies Sheena Erete Eric Corbett Natasha Smith-Walker Jay L Cunningham Erin Gatz Tina Park Tam Perry Lauren Wilcox Remi Denton Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction (2025) Preview Preview abstract Community-based partnerships are essential to creating inclusive and equitable technologies and design practices. Though recent scholarship in HCI focuses on equitable design practices, there is less focus on understanding the experiences of community-based nonprofit organizations (CBOs) when partnering with technology companies. In this paper, we focus on understanding the perspectives of CBOs by answering the following research question: What are the experiences of CBOs that have collaborated with technology companies? Through a series of design workshops with 18 participants who work at community-based nonprofits that have collaborated with technology firms, we identified four elements of community-industry collaborations that collectively shape the overall experience: divergences in cultural and organizational norms, ''setting the table,'' project relationship dynamics, and affective qualities. We conclude by discussing the power structures that impact community-industry collaboration and suggest reflective practices to guide equitable collaborations between CBOs and tech companies. View details AI and Non-Western Art Worlds: Reimagining Critical AI Futures through Artistic Inquiry and Situated Dialogue Rida Qadri Piotr Mirowski Remi Denton Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper examines the potential for localized adaptation, appropriation and re-imagination of AI for non-western cultural expression, using the Persian Gulf as a case. Using sociologist Howard Becker’s concept of ‘art worlds’ as a situated lens to evaluate generative AI, we set up an eight week experimentation and dialogue between artists, art historians and curators. Our project reveals how local art worlds 1) can appropriate AI tools to address contextual and cultural needs; 2) develop “hacks” to adapt AI for culturally-specific capabilities; and 3) can be a site for imagining alternative technological trajectories. We thus showcase the importance of expanding the scope of AI evaluations to include the social dynamics AI operates in and its contexts of use. We also reflect on the power that local communities may have to interrupt AI with more culturally-relevant orientations and to offer visions for redesigning AI for non-Western creativity. View details Can machines think efficiently? Adam Winchell arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract The Turing Test is no longer adequate for distinguishing human and machine intelligence. With advanced artificial intelligence systems already passing the original Turing Test and contributing to serious ethical and environmental concerns, we urgently need to update the test. This work expands upon the original imitation game by accounting for an additional factor: the energy spent answering the questions. By adding the constraint of energy, the new test forces us to evaluate intelligence through the lens of efficiency, connecting the abstract problem of thinking to the concrete reality of finite resources. Further, this proposed new test ensures the evaluation of intelligence has a measurable, practical finish line that the original test lacks. This additional constraint compels society to weigh the time savings of using artificial intelligence against its total resource cost. View details Exploring large language models for specialist-level oncology care Anil Palepu Vikram Dhillon Polly Niravath Wei-Hung Weng Preethi Prasad Khaled Saab Ryutaro Tanno Yong Cheng Hanh Mai Ethan Burns Zainub Ajmal Kavita Kulkarni Philip Mansfield Dale Webster Joelle Barral Juro Gottweis Mike Schaekermann Sara Mahdavi Vivek Natarajan Alan Karthikesalingam Tao Tu NEJM AI (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large language models have shown rapid progress in encoding clinical knowledge and demonstrating clinical reasoning. However, their capabilities in subspecialty or complex medical settings remain underexplored. In this work, we probe the performance of Articulate Medical Intelligence Explorer (AMIE), a conversational diagnostic AI system in the subspecialty of breast oncology care without specific fine-tuning to this challenging domain. To perform this evaluation, we curated a set of 60 synthetic breast cancer vignettes representing a range of treatment-naive, treatment-refractory, and rare histology cases encountered in a community-based breast oncology clinic. We developed a detailed clinical rubric for evaluating management plans, including axes such as the quality of case summarization, safety of the proposed care plan, and recommendations for treatment (i.e., chemotherapy, radiotherapy, surgery, and hormonal therapy). To improve performance, we enhanced AMIE with the inference-time ability to perform web search retrieval to gather relevant and up-to-date clinical knowledge and refine its responses with a multistage, self-critique pipeline. We compare the response quality of AMIE with that of internal medicine trainees, oncology fellows, and general oncology attendings under both automated and specialist clinician evaluations. Although our evaluations were limited to a few physicians, AMIE outperformed trainees and fellows, demonstrating the potential of the system in this important domain. However, AMIE’s performance was overall inferior to that of attending oncologists, suggesting that further prospective research is needed. View details Toward Foundation Models for Mobility Enriched Geospatially Embedded Objects Maria Despoina Siampou Shang-Ling Hsu Shushman Choudhury Neha Arora Cyrus Shahabi Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information Systems, ACM (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent advances in large foundation models (FMs) have enabled learning general-purpose representations in natural language, vi- sion, and audio. Yet geospatial artificial intelligence (GeoAI) still lacks widely adopted foundation models that generalize across tasks. We argue that a key bottleneck is the absence of unified, general-purpose, and transferable representations for geospatially embedded objects (GEOs). Such objects include points, polylines, and polygons in geographic space, enriched with semantic context and critical for geospatial reasoning. Much current GeoAI research compares GEOs to tokens in language models, where patterns of human movement and spatiotemporal interactions yield contextual meaning similar to patterns of words in text. However, modeling GEOs introduces challenges fundamentally different from language, including spatial continuity, variable scale and resolution, temporal dynamics, and data sparsity. Moreover, privacy constraints and global variation in mobility further complicates modeling and gen- eralization. This paper formalizes these challenges, identifies key representational gaps, and outlines research directions for build- ing foundation models that learn behavior-informed, transferable representations of GEOs from large-scale human mobility data. View details Closing the Benchmark Gap for Tiered Memory Rajath Shashidhara Simon Peter Scott Hare Kim Keeton 2025 Preview Preview abstract The increasing adoption of tiered memory in modern data centers requires reliable benchmarks to evaluate their performance. Unfortunately, existing benchmarks often fail to reflect the complexity and variability of memory access patterns of production workloads, leading to design gaps. This paper systematically explores the divergence between benchmarks and real-world memory access patterns. We propose statistical models, fleet-wide telemetry, and workload similarity metrics and discuss how they may be combined into a datadriven framework to generate representative benchmarks with high fidelity and wide coverage of production behaviors. We outline challenges for this approach and a path towards automated synthesis of production-representative benchmarks. View details Okapi: Decoupling data striping from grouping in cluster storage systems Sanjith Athlur Timothy Kim Saurabh Kadekodi Francisco Maturana Xavier Ramos Arif Merchant Rashmi KV Gregory R. Ganger 2025 Preview Preview abstract The Okapi cluster file system decouples how data is spread across disks (data striping) for IO efficiency from how data is erasure coded together (redundancy grouping) for durability. Existing systems couple these two mechanisms’ configurations, inducing significant inefficiencies. Decoupling allows grouping to be configured based on reliability and space efficiency goals, while simultaneously allowing striping to be configured based on performance goals. Decoupling also allows redundancy scheme changes from one EC scheme to another (e.g., to react to data temperature or disk failure rate changes) to occur without having to re-write data. Evaluation of an Okapi prototype shows that decoupling can be accomplished with View details 45 46 of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
