 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 16 - 30 of 676 publications chip template Remove Rapid Initial-State Preparation for the Quantum Simulation of Strongly Correlated Molecules Dominic Berry Yu Tong Tanuj Khattar Alec White Tae In Kim Sergio Boixo Lin Lin Seunghoon Lee Garnet Chan Ryan Babbush Nicholas Rubin PRX Quantum, 6 (2025), pp. 020327 Preview Preview abstract Studies on quantum algorithms for ground-state energy estimation often assume perfect ground-state preparation; however, in reality the initial state will have imperfect overlap with the true ground state. Here, we address that problem in two ways: by faster preparation of matrix-product-state (MPS) approximations and by more efficient filtering of the prepared state to find the ground-state energy. We show how to achieve unitary synthesis with a Toffoli complexity about 7 × lower than that in prior work and use that to derive a more efficient MPS-preparation method. For filtering, we present two different approaches: sampling and binary search. For both, we use the theory of window functions to avoid large phase errors and minimize the complexity. We find that the binary-search approach provides better scaling with the overlap at the cost of a larger constant factor, such that it will be preferred for overlaps less than about 0.003. Finally, we estimate the total resources to perform ground-state energy estimation of Fe-S cluster systems, including the Fe⁢Mo cofactor by estimating the overlap of different MPS initial states with potential ground states of the Fe⁢Mo cofactor using an extrapolation procedure. With a modest MPS bond dimension of 4000, our procedure produces an estimate of approximately 0.9 overlap squared with a candidate ground state of the Fe⁢Mo cofactor, producing a total resource estimate of 7.3e10 Toffoli gates; neglecting the search over candidates and assuming the accuracy of the extrapolation, this validates prior estimates that have used perfect ground-state overlap. This presents an example of a practical path to prepare states of high overlap in a challenging-to-compute chemical system. View details Sufficient Context: A New Lens on Retrieval Augmented Generation Systems Hailey Joren Jianyi Zhang Chun-Sung Ferng Da-Cheng Juan Ankur Taly Cyrus Rashtchian 2025 Preview Preview abstract Augmenting LLMs with context leads to improved performance across many applications. Despite much research on Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) systems, an open question is whether errors arise because LLMs fail to utilize the context from retrieval or the context itself is insufficient to answer the query. To shed light on this, we develop a new notion of sufficient context, along with a way to classify instances that have enough information to answer the query. We then use sufficient context to analyze several models and datasets. By stratifying errors based on context sufficiency, we find that proprietary LLMs (Gemini, GPT, Claude) excel at answering queries when the context is sufficient, but often output incorrect answers instead of abstaining when the context is not. On the other hand, open-source LLMs (Llama, Mistral, Gemma) hallucinate or abstain often, even with sufficient context. We further categorize cases when the context is useful, and improves accuracy, even though it does not fully answer the query and the model errs without the context. Building on our findings, we explore ways to reduce hallucinations in RAG systems, including a new selective generation method that leverages sufficient context information for guided abstention. Our method improves the fraction of correct answers among times where the model responds by 2--10% for Gemini, GPT, and Gemma. View details A Reduction from Multi-Parameter to Single-Parameter Bayesian Contract Design Matteo Castiglioni Junjie Chen Minming Li Haifeng Xu Song Zuo SODA 2025 (to appear) Preview Preview abstract The problem of contract design addresses the challenge of moral hazard in principle-agent setups. The agent exerts costly efforts that produce a random outcome with an associated reward for the principal. Moral hazard refers to the tension that the principal cannot observe the agent’s effort level hence needs to incentivize the agent only through rewarding the realized effort outcome, i.e., the contract. Bayesian contract design studies the principal’s design problem of an optimal contract when facing an unknown agent characterized by a private Bayesian type. In its most general form, the agent’s type is inherently “multi-parameter” and can arbitrarily affect both the agent’s productivity and effort costs. In contrast, a natural single-parameter setting of much recent interest simplifies the agent’s type to a single value that describes the agent’s cost per unit of effort, whereas agents’ efforts are assumed to be equally productive. The main result of this paper is an almost approximation-preserving polynomial-time reduction from the most general multi-parameter Bayesian contract design (BCD) to single-parameter BCD. That is, for any multi-parameter BCD instance I^M, we construct a single-parameter instance I^S such that any β-approximate contract (resp. menu of contracts) of I^S can in turn be converted to a (β − ϵ)-approximate contract (resp. menu of contracts) of I^M. The reduction is in time polynomial in the input size and log(1/ϵ); moreover, when β = 1 (i.e., the given single-parameter solution is exactly optimal), the dependence on 1/ϵ can be removed, leading to a polynomial-time exact reduction. This efficient reduction is somewhat surprising because in the closely related problem of Bayesian mechanism design, a polynomial-time reduction from multi-parameter to single-parameter setting is believed to not exist. Our result demonstrates the intrinsic difficulty of addressing moral hazard in Bayesian contract design, regardless of being single-parameter or multi-parameter. As byproducts, our reduction answers two open questions in recent literature of algorithmic contract design: (a) it implies that optimal contract design in single-parameter BCD is not in APX unless P=NP even when the agent’s type distribution is regular, answering the open question of [3] in the negative; (b) it implies that the principal’s (order-wise) tight utility gap between using a menu of contracts and a single contract is Θ(n) where n is the number of actions, answering the major open question of [27] for the single-parameter case. View details ScopeVerif: Analyzing the Security of Android’s Scoped Storage via Differential Analysis Zeyu Lei Güliz Seray Tuncay Beatrice Carissa Williem Z. Berkay Celik Antonio Bianchi 2025 Preview Preview abstract Storage on Android has evolved significantly over the years, with each new Android version introducing changes aimed at enhancing usability, security, and privacy. While these updates typically help with restricting app access to storage through various mechanisms, they may occasionally introduce new complexities and vulnerabilities. A prime example is the introduction of scoped storage in Android 10, which fundamentally changed how apps interact with files. While intended to enhance user privacy by limiting broad access to shared storage, scoped storage has also presented developers with new challenges and potential vulnerabilities to address. However, despite its significance for user privacy and app functionality, no systematic studies have been performed to study Android’s scoped storage at depth from a security perspective. In this paper, we present the first systematic security analysis of the scoped storage mechanism. To this end, we design and implement a testing tool, named ScopeVerif, that relies on differential analysis to uncover security issues and implementation inconsistencies in Android’s storage. Specifically, ScopeVerif takes a list of security properties and checks if there are any file operations that violate any security properties defined in the official Android documentation. Additionally, we conduct a comprehensive analysis across different Android versions as well as a cross-OEM analysis to identify discrepancies in different implementations and their security implications. Our study identifies both known and unknown issues of scoped storage. Our cross-version analysis highlights undocumented changes as well as partially fixed security loopholes across versions. Additionally, we discovered several vulnerabilities in scoped storage implementations by different OEMs. These vulnerabilities stem from deviations from the documented and correct behavior, which potentially poses security risks. The affected OEMs and Google have acknowledged our findings and offered us bug bounties in response. View details Gemini & Physical World: Large Language Models Can Estimate the Intensity of Earthquake Shaking from Multi-Modal Social Media Posts Mostafa Mousavi Marc Stogaitis Tajinder Gadh Richard Allen Alexei Barski Robert Bosch Patrick Robertson Youngmin Cho Nivetha Thiruverahan Aman Raj Geophysical Journal International (2025), ggae436 Preview Preview abstract This paper presents a novel approach for estimating the ground shaking intensity using real-time social media data and CCTV footage. Employing the Gemini 1.5 Pro’s (Reid et al. 2024) model, a multi-modal language model, we demonstrate the ability to extract relevant information from unstructured data utilizing generative AI and natural language processing. The model’s output, in the form of Modified Mercalli Intensity (MMI) values, align well with independent observational data. Furthermore, our results suggest that beyond its advanced visual and auditory understanding abilities, Gemini appears to utilize additional sources of knowledge, including a simplified understanding of the general relationship between earthquake magnitude, distance, and MMI intensity, which it presumably acquired during its training, in its reasoning and decision-making processes. These findings raise intriguing questions about the extent of Gemini's general understanding of the physical world and its phenomena. Gemini’s ability to generate results consistent with established scientific knowledge highlights the potential of LLMs like Gemini in augmenting our understanding of complex physical phenomena such as earthquakes. More specifically, the results of this study highlight the potential of LLMs like Gemini to revolutionize citizen seismology by enabling rapid, effective, and flexible analysis of crowdsourced data from eyewitness accounts for assessing earthquake impact and providing crisis situational awareness. This approach holds a great promise for improving early warning systems, disaster response, and overall resilience in earthquake-prone regions. This study provides a significant step toward harnessing the power of social media and AI for earthquake disaster mitigation. View details Beyond Touchscreens: Dynamic and Multimodal Interaction Needs Melissa Barnhart Wantland Paula Conn Mai Kobori Universal Access in Human-Computer Interaction, Springer-Verlag (2025) Preview Preview abstract Today’s smartphone interactions are typically designed with one primary preset, accompanied by customization settings that can be manually adjusted. To promote the creation of contextually aware experiences, researchers have highlighted the factors that influence mobile device usage in the ability-based design framework. This paper expands upon existing frameworks and contributes to an empirical understanding of smartphone accessibility. Through a 10-day longitudinal diary study and video interview with 24 individuals who do and do not identify as having a disability, the research also illustrates the reactions of reattempt, adaptation, and avoidance, which were used in response to a lack of smartphone accessibility. Despite experiencing scenarios where accessibility settings could be leveraged, 20 out of 24 participants did not use accessibility settings on their smartphone. A total of 12 out of 24 participants tried accessibility settings on their smartphones, however identifying accessibility was not for them. This work highlights the need to shift current design practices to better serve the accessibility community. View details PreFix: Optimizing the Performance of Heap-Intensive Applications Chaitanya Mamatha Ananda Rajiv Gupta Sriraman Tallam Han Shen David Li CGO 2025: International Symposium on Code Generation and Optimization, Las Vegas, NV, USA (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Analyses of heap-intensive applications show that a small fraction of heap objects account for the majority of heap accesses and data cache misses. Prior works like HDS and HALO have shown that allocating hot objects in separate memory regions can improve spatial locality leading to better application performance. However, these techniques are constrained in two primary ways, limiting their gains. First, these techniques have Imperfect Separation, polluting the hot memory region with several cold objects. Second, reordering of objects across allocations is not possible as the original object allocation order is preserved. This paper presents a novel technique that achieves near perfect separation of hot objects via a new context mechanism that efficiently identifies hot objects with high precision. This technique, named PreFix, is based upon Preallocating memory for a Fixed small number of hot objects. The program, guided by profiles, is instrumented to compute context information derived from dynamic object identifiers, that precisely identifies hot object allocations that are then placed at predetermined locations in the preallocated memory. The preallocated memory region for hot objects provides the flexibility to reorder objects across allocations and allows colocation of objects that are part of a hot data stream (HDS), improving spatial locality. The runtime overhead of identifying hot objects is not significant as this optimization is only focused on a small number of static hot allocation sites and dynamic hot objects. While there is an increase in the program’s memory foot-print, it is manageable and can be controlled by limiting the size of the preallocated memory. In addition, PreFix incorporates an object recycling optimization that reuses the same preallocated space to store different objects whose lifetimes are not expected to overlap. Our experiments with 13 heap-intensive applications yields reductions in execution times ranging from 2.77% to 74%. On average PreFix reduces execution time by 21.7% compared to 7.3% by HDS and 14% by HALO. This is due to PreFix’s precision in hot object identification, hot object colocation, and low runtime overhead. View details Fairness and Optimality in Routing Sreenivas Gollapudi Kostas Kollias Alkmini Sgouritsa Ali Sinop AAMAS (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study the existence of almost fair and near-optimal solutions to a routing problem as defined in the seminal work of Rosenthal. We focus on the setting where multiple alternative routes are available for each potential request (which corresponds to a potential user of the network). This model captures a collection of diverse applications such as packet routing in communication networks, routing in road networks with multiple alternative routes, and the economics of transportation of goods. Our recommended routes have provable guarantees in terms of both the total cost and fairness concepts such as approximate envy-freeness. We employ and appropriately combine tools from algorithmic game theory and fair division. Our results apply on two distinct models: the splittable case where the request is split among the selected paths (e.g., routing a fleet of trucks) and the unsplittable case where the request is assigned to one of its designated paths (e.g., a single user request). Finally, we conduct an empirical analysis to test the performance of our approach against simpler baselines using the real world road network of New York City. View details Databases in the Era of Memory-Centric Computing Yannis Chronis Anastasia Ailamaki Lawrence Benson Helena Caminal Jana Gičeva Dave Patterson Eric Seldar Lisa Wu Wills 2025 Preview Preview abstract The increasing disparity between processor core counts and memory bandwidth, coupled with the rising cost and underutilization of memory, introduces a performance and cost Memory Wall and presents a significant challenge to the scalability of database systems. We argue that current processor-centric designs are unsustainable, and we advocate for a shift towards memory-centric computing, where disaggregated memory pools enable cost-effective scaling and robust performance. Database systems are uniquely positioned to leverage memory-centric systems because of their intrinsic data-centric nature. We demonstrate how memory-centric database operations can be realized with current hardware, paving the way for more efficient and scalable data management in the cloud. View details Circadian rhythm of heart rate and activity: a cross-sectional study Maryam Khalid Logan Schneider Aravind Natarajan Conor Heneghan Karla Gleichauf Chronobiology International (2025) Preview Preview abstract ABSTRACT Background: Circadian rhythms are commonly observed in a number of physiological processes. Consumer wearable devices have made it possible to obtain continuous time series data from a large number of individuals. We study circadian rhythms from measurements of heart rate, movement, and sleep, from a cohort of nearly 20,000 participants over the course of 30 days. Methods: Participation was restricted to Fitbit users of age 21 years or older residing in the United States or Canada. Participants were enrolled through a recruitment banner shown on the Fitbit App. The advertisement was shown to 531,359 Fitbit users, and 23,239 enrolled in the program. Of these, we obtained heart rate data from 19,350 participants. We obtain the underlying circadian rhythm from time series heart rate by modeling the circadian rhythm as a sum over the first two Fourier harmonics. The first Fourier harmonic accounts for the 24-hour rhythmicity, while the second harmonic accounts for non-sinusoidal perturbations. Findings: We observe a circadian rhythm in both heart rate and acceleration. From the diurnal modulation, we obtain the following circadian parameters: (i) amplitude of modulation, (ii) bathyphase, (iii) acrophase, (iv) non-sinusoidal fraction, and (v) fraction of day when the heart rate is greater than the mean. The amplitude, bathyphase, and acrophase depend on sex, and decrease with age. The waketime on average, follows the bathyphase by 2.4 hours. In most individuals, the circadian rhythm of heart rate lags the circadian rhythm of activity. Interpretation: Circadian metrics for heart rate and activity can be reliably obtained from commercially available wearable devices. Distributions of circadian metrics can be valuable tools for individual-level interpretation. View details Automatic Synthesis of Specialized Hash Function Renato B Hoffmann Leonardo G Fae Fernando Magno Quintao Pereira David Li Dalvan Grieber 2025 Preview Preview abstract Hashing is a fundamental operation in various computer sci- ence applications. Despite the prevalence of specific key formats like social security numbers, MAC addresses, plate numbers, and URLs, hashing libraries typically treat them as general byte sequences. This paper introduces a technique for synthesizing specialized hash functions tailored to par- ticular byte formats. The proposed code generation method leverages three prevalent patterns: (i) fixed-length keys, (ii) keys with common subsequences, and (iii) keys ranging on predetermined sequences of bytes. The code generation pro- cess involves two algorithms: one identifies relevant regular expressions within key examples, and the other generates specialized hash functions based on these expressions. This approach, straightforward to implement, showcases improve- ments over highly optimized hash function implementations. Comparative analysis demonstrates that our synthetic func- tions outperform counterparts in the C++ Standard Template Library and the Google Abseil Library, achieving speedups ranging from 2% to 11%, depending on the key format. View details YETI (YET to Intervene) Proactive Interventions by Multimodal AI Agents in Augmented Reality Tasks Saptarashmi Bandyopadhyay Vikas Bahirwani Lavisha Aggarwal Bhanu Guda Lin Li Andrea Colaco 2025 Preview Preview abstract Multimodal AI Agents are AI models that have the capability of interactively and cooperatively assisting human users to solve day-to-day tasks. Augmented Reality (AR) head worn devices can uniquely improve the user experience of solving procedural day-to-day tasks by providing egocentric multimodal (audio and video) observational capabilities to AI Agents. Such AR capabilities can help the AI Agents see and listen to actions that users take which can relate to multimodal capabilities of human users. Existing AI Agents, either Large Language Models (LLMs) or Multimodal Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are reactive in nature, which means that models cannot take an action without reading or listening to the human user's prompts. Proactivity of AI Agents, on the other hand, can help the human user detect and correct any mistakes in agent observed tasks, encourage users when they do tasks correctly, or simply engage in conversation with the user - akin to a human teaching or assisting a user. Our proposed YET to Intervene (YETI) multimodal Agent focuses on the research question of identifying circumstances that may require the Agent to intervene proactively. This allows the Agent to understand when it can intervene in a conversation with human users that can help the user correct mistakes on tasks, like cooking, using Augmented Reality. Our YETI Agent learns scene understanding signals based on interpretable notions of Structural Similarity (SSIM) on consecutive video frames. We also define the alignment signal which the AI Agent can learn to identify if the video frames corresponding to the user's actions on the task are consistent with expected actions. These signals are used by our AI Agent to determine when it should proactively intervene. We compare our results on the instances of proactive intervention in the HoloAssist multimodal benchmark for an expert agent guiding an user agent to complete procedural tasks. View details Scaling Laws for Downstream Task Performance in Machine Translation Berivan Isik Natalia Ponomareva Hussein Hazimeh Dimitris Paparas Sergei Vassilvitskii Sanmi Koyejo International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Scaling laws provide important insights that can guide the design of large language models (LLMs). Existing work has primarily focused on studying scaling laws for pretraining (upstream) loss. However, in transfer learning settings, in which LLMs are pretrained on an unsupervised dataset and then finetuned on a downstream task, we often also care about the downstream performance. In this work, we study the scaling behavior in a transfer learning setting, where LLMs are finetuned for machine translation tasks. Specifically, we investigate how the choice of the \emph{pretraining} data and its size affect downstream performance (translation quality) as judged by: downstream cross-entropy and translation quality metrics such as BLEU and COMET scores. Our experiments indicate that the size of the finetuning dataset and the distribution alignment between the pretraining and downstream data significantly influence the scaling behavior. With sufficient alignment, both downstream cross-entropy and translation quality scores improve monotonically with more pretraining data. In such cases, we show that it is possible to predict the downstream translation quality metrics with good accuracy using a log-law. However, there are cases where moderate misalignment causes the downstream translation scores to fluctuate or get worse with more pretraining, whereas downstream cross-entropy monotonically improves. By analyzing these, we provide new practical insights for choosing appropriate pretraining data. View details Linear Elastic Caching via Ski Rental Tamas Sarlos Todd Lipcon Ravi Kumar Manish Purohit The biennial Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (2025) Preview Preview abstract In this work we study the Linear Elastic Caching problem, where the goal is to minimize the total cost of a cache inclusive of not just its misses, but also its memory footprint integrated over time. We demonstrate a theoretical connection to the classic ski rental problem and propose a practical algorithm that combines online caching algorithms with ski rental policies. We also introduce a lightweight machine learning-based algorithm for ski rental that is optimized for production workloads and is easy to integrate within existing database systems. Evaluations on both production workloads in Google Spanner and publicly available traces show that the proposed elastic caching approach can significantly reduce the total cache cost compared to traditional fixed-size cache policies. View details Contextual Agent Security: A Policy for Every Purpose Lillian Tsai Eugene Bagdasaryan HOTOS (2025) Preview Preview abstract Judging an action’s safety requires knowledge of the context in which the action takes place. To human agents who act in various contexts, this may seem obvious: performing an action such as email deletion may or may not be appropriate depending on the email’s content, the goal (e.g., to erase sensitive emails or to clean up trash), and the type of email address (e.g., work or personal). Unlike people, computational systems have often had only limited agency in limited contexts. Thus, manually crafted policies and user confirmation (e.g., smartphone app permissions or network access control lists), while imperfect, have sufficed to restrict harmful actions. However, with the upcoming deployment of generalist agents that support a multitude of tasks (e.g., an automated personal assistant), we argue that we must rethink security designs to adapt to the scale of contexts and capabilities of these systems. As a first step, this paper explores contextual security in the domain of agents and proposes contextual agent security (Conseca), a framework to generate just-in-time, contextual, and human-verifiable security policies. View details 2 3 4 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
