 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 346 - 360 of 676 publications chip template Remove Quasiparticle-induced decoherence of a driven superconducting qubit Mykola Kishmar Pavel Kurilovich Vlad Kurilovich Thomas Connolly Andrey Klots Igor Aleiner arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract We develop a theory for two quasiparticle-induced decoherence mechanisms of a driven superconducting qubit. In the first mechanism, an existing quasiparticle (QP) tunnels across the qubit’s Josephson junction while simultaneously absorbing a qubit excitation and one (or several) photons from the drive. In the second mechanism, a qubit transition occurs during the non-linear absorption process converting multiple drive quanta into a pair of new QPs. Both mechanisms can remain significant in gap engineered qubits whose coherence is insensitive to QPs without the drive. Our theory establishes a fundamental limitation on fidelity of the microwave qubit operations—such as readout and gates—stemming from QPs. View details Is API Access to LLMs Useful for Generating Private Synthetic Tabular Data? Marika Swanberg Albert Cheu Edo Roth Peter Kairouz Ryan McKenna 2025 Preview Preview abstract Differentially private (DP) synthetic data is a versatile tool for enabling the analysis of private data. With the rise of foundation models, a number of new synthetic data algorithms privately finetune the weights of foundation models to improve over existing approaches to generating private synthetic data. In this work, we propose two algorithms for using API access only to generate DP tabular synthetic data. We extend the Private Evolution algorithm \citep{lin2023differentially, xie2024differentially} to the tabular data domain, define a workload-based distance measure, and propose a family of algorithms that use one-shot API access to LLMs. View details The Impact of New Information Disclosure on Firm's Information Asymmetry and Liquidity Aida Davani Sahand Davani 2025 Preview Preview abstract We study the effect of a firm's new information disclosure on the information asymmetry between its informed and uninformed investors and its liquidity. To do this, we employ advanced natural language processing (NLP) methods to introduce a novel measure of firms' 10-K filing predictability that quantifies the amount of new information in these reports. Our findings show that more new information is associated with higher bid-ask spreads and lower trading volumes, indicating increased information asymmetry and reduced liquidity, respectively. Notably, institutional ownership moderates these effects, suggesting that sophisticated investors can mitigate the adverse consequences of disclosure unpredictability. An event study analysis further reveals that more new information triggers increased trading activity and abnormal returns immediately after disclosure, though these effects are short-lived. View details Round Elimination via Self-Reduction: Closing Gaps for Distributed Maximal Matching Seri Khoury Aaron Schild 2025 Preview Preview abstract We show that there is no randomized LOCAL algorithm for maximal matching (MM) that takes o(min(log D, sqrt(log n))) rounds, even on regular graphs and trees. This improves upon the KMW bound from 21 years ago and shows a surprising separation between MM and MIS on trees, among other implications. View details How Expressive are Knowledge Graph Foundation Models? Xingyue Huang Pablo Barcelo Michael Bronstein Ismail Ilkan Ceylan Michael Galkin Juan Reutter Miguel Romero Orth ICML 2025 Preview Preview abstract Knowledge Graph Foundation Models (KGFMs) are at the frontier for deep learning on knowledge graphs (KGs), as they can generalize to completely novel knowledge graphs with different relational vocabularies. Despite their empirical success, our theoretical understanding of KGFMs remains very limited. In this paper, we conduct a rigorous study of the expressive power of KGFMs. Specifically, we show that the expressive power of KGFMs directly depends on the motifs that are used to learn the relation representations. We then observe that the most typical motifs used in the existing literature are binary, as the representations are learned based on how pairs of relations interact, which limits the model's expressiveness. As part of our study, we design more expressive KGFMs using richer motifs, which necessitate learning relation representations based on, e.g., how triples of relations interact with each other. Finally, we empirically validate our theoretical findings, showing that the use of richer motifs results in better performance on a wide range of datasets drawn from different domains. View details Cortina Conference Opening Remarks Yu Chen (2025) Preview Preview abstract Giving a short opening remark presentation at a Google host conference about superconducting qubits (https://ai-quantum.cortinadampezzo.it/). This is just high-level review the progress and challenges in the field of superconducting qubits View details Balancing AI and Human Insights in Scientific Discovery: Challenges and Guidelines Javier García-Martínez Pilar Manchon Ricardo Vinuesa Sergio Hoyas The Innovation (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have enabled AI systems to autonomously assist in scientific research, from hypothesis generation to laboratory experimentation, transforming how research proposals are written and experiments are designed. Tools like AI "co-scientists" promise to enhance scientific productivity but raise concerns about diminishing human intuition, reinforcing incremental research, and concentrating power among a few entities. As LLMs become increasingly integrated into research processes, there is a risk of reduced creativity, ethical misconduct, and overreliance on AI-driven evaluation systems. To address these challenges, in this article we propose ethical guidelines focusing on transparency, accountability, fairness, and safeguarding transformative research. Ultimately, AI should be used to augment—not replace—human insight in scientific discovery.n View details Project Euphonia: Advancing Inclusive Speech Recognition through Expanded Data Collection and Evaluation Alicia Martín Bob MacDonald Julie Cattiau Pan-Pan Jiang Jimmy Tobin Philip Q Nelson Katrin Tomanek Frontiers in Language Sciences (2025) Preview Preview abstract Speech recognition models, predominantly trained on standard speech, often exhibit lower accuracy for individuals with accents, dialects, or speech impairments. This disparity is particularly pronounced for economically or socially marginalized communities, including those with disabilities or diverse linguistic backgrounds. Project Euphonia, a Google initiative originally launched in English dedicated to improving Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) of disordered speech, is expanding its data collection and evaluation efforts to include international languages like Spanish, Japanese, French and Hindi, in a continued effort to enhance inclusivity. This paper presents an overview of the extension of processes and methods used for English data collection to more languages and locales, progress on the collected data, and details about our model evaluation process, focusing on meaning preservation based on Generative AI. View details Sequentially Auditing Differential Privacy Tomas Gonzalez Lara Mateo Dulce Aaditya Ramdas Monica Ribero Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2025) Preview Preview abstract We propose a practical sequential test for auditing differential privacy guarantees of black-box mechanisms. The test processes streams of mechanisms' outputs providing anytime valid inference while controlling Type I error, overcoming the fixed sample size limitation of previous batch auditing methods. Experiments show this test detects violations with sample sizes that are orders of magnitude smaller than existing methods, across diverse realistic mechanisms. Notably, it identifies DP-SGD privacy violations in under one training run, unlike prior methods needing full model training. View details On residual network depth Benoit Dherin Michael Munn 2025 Preview Preview abstract Deep residual architectures, such as ResNet and the Transformer, have enabled models of unprecedented depth, yet a formal understanding of why depth is so effective remains an open question. A popular intuition, following Veit et al. (2016), is that these residual networks behave like ensembles of many shallower models. Our key finding is an explicit analytical formula that verifies this ensemble perspective, proving that increasing network depth is mathematically equivalent to expanding the size of this implicit ensemble. Furthermore, our expansion reveals a hierarchical ensemble structure in which the combinatorial growth of computation paths leads to an explosion in the output signal, explaining the historical necessity of normalization layers in training deep models. This insight offers a first-principles explanation for the historical dependence on normalization layers and sheds new light on a family of successful normalization-free techniques like SkipInit and Fixup. However, while these previous approaches infer scaling factors through optimizer analysis or a heuristic analogy to Batch Normalization, our work offers the first explanation derived directly from the network’s inherent functional structure. Specifically, our Residual Expansion Theorem reveals that scaling each residual module provides a principled solution to taming the combinatorial explosion inherent to these architectures. We further show that this scaling acts as a capacity controls that also implicitly regularizes the model’s complexity. View details UWB Radar-based Heart Rate Monitoring: A Transfer Learning Approach Elzbieta Gruzewska Pooja Rao Sebastien Baur Matthew Baugh Mathias M.J. Bellaiche Sharanya Srinivas Octavio Ponce Matthew Thompson Pramod Rudrapatna Michael A. Sanchez Lawrence Z. Cai Timothy JA Chico Robert F Storey Emily Maz Umesh Telang Shravya Shetty Mayank Daswani arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Radar technology presents untapped potential for continuous, contactless, and passive heart rate monitoring via consumer electronics like mobile phones. However the variety of available radar systems and lack of standardization means that a large new paired dataset collection is required for each radar system. This study demonstrates transfer learning between frequency-modulated continuous wave (FMCW) and impulse-radio ultra-wideband (IR-UWB) radar systems, both increasingly integrated into consumer devices. FMCW radar utilizes a continuous chirp, while IR-UWB radar employs short pulses. Our mm-wave FMCW radar operated at 60 GHz with a 5.5 GHz bandwidth (2.7 cm resolution, 3 receiving antennas [Rx]), and our IR-UWB radar at 8 GHz with a 500 MHz bandwidth (30 cm resolution, 2 Rx). Using a novel 2D+1D ResNet architecture we achieved a mean absolute error (MAE) of 0.85 bpm and a mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) of 1.42% for heart rate monitoring with FMCW radar (N=119 participants, an average of 8 hours per participant). This model maintained performance (under 5 MAE/10% MAPE) across various body positions and heart rate ranges, with a 98.9% recall. We then fine-tuned a variant of this model, trained on single-antenna and single-range bin FMCW data, using a small (N=376, avg 6 minutes per participant) IR-UWB dataset. This transfer learning approach yielded a model with MAE 4.1 bpm and MAPE 6.3% (97.5% recall), a 25% MAE reduction over the IR-UWB baseline. This demonstration of transfer learning between radar systems for heart rate monitoring has the potential to accelerate its introduction into existing consumer devices. View details Text to 3D Object Generation for Scalable Room Assembly Sonia Laguna Alberto García García Marie-Julie Rakotosaona Stylianos Moschoglou Leonhard Helminger Sergio Orts Escolano 2025 Preview Preview abstract Modern machine learning models for scene understanding, such as depth estimation and object tracking, rely on large, high-quality datasets that mimic real-world deployment scenarios. To address data scarcity, an end-to-end system for synthetic data generation for scalable, high-quality, and customizable 3D indoor scenes. By integrating text-to-image and multi-view diffusion models with NeRF-based meshing, this system generates high-fidelity 3D assets from text prompts and incorporates them into pre-defined floor plans using a rendering tool, Blender. By incorporating novel loss functions and training strategies into prior existing methods, or method supports on-demand object generation, bridging the domain gap between synthetic and real-world data. This system advances synthetic data’s role in addressing machine learning training limitations, enabling more robust and generalizable models for real-world applications. View details Develop High-performance Quantum Hardware Yu Chen (2025) Preview Preview abstract A review on the hardware development in QAI, based on existing publications View details Envisioning Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander AI Futures Ben Hutchinson Journal of Global Indigeneity (2025) Preview Preview abstract In January 2025, over forty Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander researchers, practitioners, community members, and allies, gathered at the Centre for Global Indigenous Futures at the Wallumattagal Campus of Macquarie University in Sydney to envisage Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander AI futures. This publication reports on attendees' vision for the future of AI for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. View details Empirical Privacy Variance Ruicheng Xian Chiyuan Zhang Fan Wu Yuzheng Hu Pritish Kamath David Forsyth Yuhang Liu Lydia Zakynthinou International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (2025) Preview Preview abstract We propose the notion of empirical privacy variance and study it in the context of differentially private fine-tuning of language models. Specifically, we show that models calibrated to the same (ε,δ)-DP guarantee using DP-SGD with different hyperparameter configurations can exhibit significant variations in empirical privacy, which we quantify through the lens of memorization. We investigate the generality of this phenomenon across multiple dimensions and discuss why it is surprising and relevant. Through regression analysis, we examine how individual and composite hyperparameters influence empirical privacy. The results reveal a no-free-lunch trade-off: existing practices of hyperparameter tuning in DP-SGD, which focus on optimizing utility under a fixed privacy budget, often come at the expense of empirical privacy. To address this, we propose refined heuristics for hyperparameter selection that explicitly account for empirical privacy, showing that they are both precise and practically useful. Finally, we take preliminary steps to understand empirical privacy variance. We propose two hypotheses, identify limitations in existing techniques like privacy auditing, and outline open questions for future research. View details 24 25 26 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
