 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 241 - 255 of 676 publications chip template Remove PC-SRIF: Preconditioned Cholesky-based Square Root Information Filter for Vision-aided Inertial Navigation Weikun Zhen Yun Zhang Parth Agrawal Ryan DuToit Chao Guo Tong Ke Toby Sharp 2025 Preview Preview abstract In this paper, we introduce a novel estimator for vision-aided inertial navigation systems (VINS), the Preconditioned Cholesky-based Square Root Information Filter (PC-SRIF). When working with linear systems, employing Cholesky decomposition offers superior efficiency but can compromise numerical stability. Due to this, existing VINS literature on (Square Root) Information Filters often opts for QR decomposition on platforms where single precision is preferred, avoiding the numerical challenges associated with Cholesky decomposition. While these issues are often attributed to the ill-conditioned information matrix in VINS, our analysis reveals that this is not an inherent property of VINS but rather a consequence of specific parametrizations. We identify several factors that contribute to an ill-conditioned information matrix and propose a preconditioning technique to mitigate these conditioning issues. Building on this analysis, we present PC-SRIF, which exhibits remarkable stability in performing Cholesky decomposition using single precision when solving linear systems in VINS. Consequently, PC-SRIF achieves superior theoretical efficiency compared to alternative estimators. To validate the efficiency advantages and numerical stability of PC-SRIF based VINS, we have conducted carefully controlled experiments, which provide empirical evidence in support of our theoretical findings. Empirically, in our VINS, PC-SRIF achieves more than 2x better efficiency than SRIF. View details Dividing conflicting items fairly Ayumi Igarashi Pasin Manurangsi Hirotaka Yoneda IJCAI (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study the allocation of indivisible goods under conflicting constraints, represented by a graph. In this framework, vertices correspond to goods and edges correspond to conflicts between a pair of goods. Each agent is allocated an independent set in the graph. In a recent work of [Kumar et al., 2024], it was shown that a maximal EF1 allocation exists for interval graphs and two agents with monotone valuations. We significantly extend this result by establishing that a maximal EF1 allocation exists for *any graph* when the two agents have monotone valuations. To compute such an allocation, we present a polynomial-time algorithm for additive valuations as well as a pseudo-polynomial time algorithm for monotone valuations. Moreover, we complement our findings by providing a counter example demonstrating a maximal EF1 allocation may not exist for three agents with monotone valuations. Additionally, we establish NP-hardness of determining the existence of such allocations for every fixed number n of agents. View details Robustness to Reward Scale in Contextual Bandit Learning Chenlu Ye Tong Zhang Alekh Agarwal ICML 2025 Preview Preview abstract Most contextual bandit algorithms assume that rewards are bounded uniformly, or with a high probability for each context and action. Furthermore, the theoretical regret, as well as empirical performance of most prevailing methods scales polynomially with this reward scale. In this work, we use ideas from robust mean estimation to design contextual bandit algorithms where the regret has only a mild logarithmic scaling on the reward scale, with a polynomial dependence on the second moment rather than the maximum reward value. Our algorithm is based on Catoni's mean estimator, is applicable to arbitrary non-linear function classes, and we present both variance aware and variance agnostic versions of our approach. View details On the Differential Privacy and Interactivity of Privacy Sandbox Reports Badih Ghazi Charlie Harrison Arpana Hosabettu Pritish Kamath Alexander Knop Ravi Kumar Ethan Leeman Pasin Manurangsi Mariana Raykova Vikas Sahu Phillipp Schoppmann PETS (2025) Preview Preview abstract The Privacy Sandbox initiative from Google includes APIs for enabling privacy-preserving advertising functionalities as part of the effort to limit third-party cookies. In particular, the Private Aggregation API (PAA) and the Attribution Reporting API (ARA) can be used for ad measurement while providing different guardrails for safeguarding user privacy, including a framework for satisfying differential privacy (DP). In this work, we provide an abstract model for analyzing the privacy of these APIs and show that they satisfy a formal DP guarantee under certain assumptions. Our analysis handles the case where both the queries and database can change interactively based on previous responses from the API. View details Asymptotic Fair Division: Chores Are Easier Than Goods Pasin Manurangsi Warut Suksompong IJCAI (2025) Preview Preview abstract When dividing items among agents, two of the most widely studied fairness notions are envy-freeness and proportionality. We consider a setting where m chores are allocated to n agents and the disutility of each chore for each agent is drawn from a probability distribution. We show that an envy-free allocation exists with high probability provided that m ≥ 2n, and moreover, m must be at least n + Θ(n) in order for the existence to hold. On the other hand, we prove that a proportional allocation is likely to exist as long as m = ω(1), and this threshold is asymptotically tight. Our results reveal a clear contrast with the allocation of goods, where a larger number of items is necessary to ensure existence for both notions. View details A Bayesian Model Selection Criterion for Selecting Pretraining Checkpoints Michael Munn Susan Wei 2025 Preview Preview abstract This paper investigates the theoretical underpinnings of the widely successful pretrain-then-adapt strategy for foundation models. We introduce a Bayesian model selection criterion, termed the downstream free energy, which quantifies the adaptability of a pretrained checkpoint by measuring, under the downstream data distribution, the concentration of favorable solutions near the checkpoint. However, minimizing this downstream free energy is infeasible without access to downstream data. To address this, we show that under certain conditions, mini- mizing the upstream free energy – which can be estimated using only upstream data – can serve as a reliable proxy. We validate this theoretical insight through preliminary experiments, showing that commonly used pretraining heuristics ef- fectively lower upstream free energy, leading to better downstream performance. View details Learning Optimal Posted Prices for a Unit-Demand Buyer Yifeng Teng Yifan Wang 2025 Preview Preview abstract We study the problem of learning the optimal item pricing for a unit-demand buyer with independent item values, and we have query access to the underlying value distributions. We consider two common query model in the literature: the “sample complexity” model where we can obtain a sample of each item value, and the “pricing query complexity” model where we can set a price to each item and obtain a binary signal on whether the sampled value of the item is greater than our proposed price. In this work we give nearly tight sample complexity and pricing query complexity of the problem. View details Junction and inductor models in ADS Ofer Naaman (2025) Preview Preview abstract This note is a follow up to Ref. [Naaman, IEEE TAS 2025], describing how to construct Josephson junction, inductor, and mutual inductance models using components that are available in the Keysight ADS core library. View details NucleoBench: A Large-Scale Benchmark of Neural Nucleic Acid Design Algorithms Joel Shor Erik Strand Cory Y. McLean 2025 Preview Preview abstract An outstanding open problem with high therapeutic value is how to design nucleic acid sequences with specific properties. Even just the 5’ UTR sequence admits 2×10^120 possibilities, making exhaustive exploration impossible. Although the field has focused on developing high-quality predictive models, techniques for generating sequences with desired properties are often not well benchmarked. Lack of benchmarking hinders the production of the best molecules from high quality models and slows the improvement of design algorithms. In this work, we performed the first large-scale comparison of modern sequence design algorithms across 16 biological tasks (such as transcription factor binding and gene expression) and 9 design algorithms. Our benchmark, NucleoBench, compares design algorithms on the same tasks and start sequences across more than 400K experiments, allowing us to derive unique modeling insights on the importance of using gradient information, the role of randomness, scaling properties, and reasonable starting hyperparameters on new problems. We use these insights to present a novel hybrid design algorithm, AdaBeam, which outperforms existing algorithms on 11 of 16 tasks and demonstrates superior scaling properties on long sequences and large predictors. Our benchmark and algorithms are freely available online. View details Load Balancing with Network Latencies via Distributed Gradient Descent Santiago Balseiro Vahab Mirrokni Bartek Wydrowski 2025 Preview Preview abstract Motivated by the growing demand for serving large language model inference requests, we study distributed load balancing for global serving systems with network latencies. We consider a fluid model in which continuous flows of requests arrive at different frontends and need to be routed to distant backends for processing whose processing rates are workload dependent. Network latencies can lead to long travel times for requests and delayed feedback from backends. The objective is to minimize the average latency of requests, composed of the network latency and the serving latency at the backends. We introduce Distributed Gradient Descent Load Balancing (DGD-LB), a probabilistic routing algorithm in which each frontend adjusts the routing probabilities dynamically using gradient descent. Our algorithm is distributed: there is no coordination between frontends, except by observing the delayed impact other frontends have on shared backends. The algorithm uses an approximate gradient that measures the marginal impact of an additional request evaluated at a delayed system state. Equilibrium points of our algorithm minimize the centralized optimal average latencies, and we provide a novel local stability analysis showing that our algorithm converges to an optimal solution when started sufficiently close to that point. Moreover, we present sufficient conditions on the step-size of gradient descent that guarantee convergence in the presence of network latencies. Numerical experiments show that our algorithm is globally stable and optimal, confirm our stability conditions are nearly tight, and demonstrate that DGD-LB can lead to substantial gains relative to other load balancers studied in the literature when network latencies are large. View details Applying multimodal AI to physiological waveforms improves genetic prediction of cardiovascular traits Yuchen Zhou Justin Khasentino Ted Yun Mahantesh I. Biradar Jacqueline Shreibati Dongbing Lai Tae-Hwi Schwantes-An Robert Luben Zachary R. McCaw Jorgen Engmann Rui Providencia Amand Floriaan Schmidt Patricia B. Munroe Howard Yang Andrew Carroll Anthony Khawaja Cory Y. McLean Babak Behsaz Farhad Hormozdiari American Journal of Human Genetics, 112 (2025), pp. 1562 - 1579 Preview Preview abstract Electronic health records, biobanks, and wearable biosensors enable the collection of multiple health modalities from many individuals. Access to multimodal health data provides a unique opportunity for genetic studies of complex traits because different modalities relevant to a single physiological system (e.g., circulatory system) encode complementary and overlapping information. We propose a multimodal deep learning method, multimodal representation learning for genetic discovery on low-dimensional embeddings (M-REGLE), for discovering genetic associations from a joint representation of complementary electrophysiological waveform modalities. M-REGLE jointly learns a lower representation (i.e., latent factors) of multimodal physiological waveforms using a convolutional variational autoencoder, performs genome-wide association studies (GWASs) on each latent factor, then combines the results to study the genetics of the underlying system. To validate the advantages of M-REGLE and multimodal learning, we apply it to common cardiovascular modalities (photoplethysmogram [PPG] and electrocardiogram [ECG]) and compare its results to unimodal learning methods in which representations are learned from each data modality separately but are statistically combined for downstream genetic comparison. M-REGLE identifies 19.3% more loci on the 12-lead ECG dataset, 13.0% more loci on the ECG lead I + PPG dataset, and its genetic risk score significantly outperforms the unimodal risk score at predicting cardiac phenotypes, such as atrial fibrillation (Afib), in multiple biobanks. View details ECG-Nest-FM: A Frequency-Focused ECG Foundation Model with Nested Embeddings Abhishek Sharma Lin Yang Cory Y. McLean Justin Cosentino Farhad Hormozdiari ICLR 2025 Workshop MLGenX (2025) Preview Preview abstract Electrocardiograms (ECGs) are fundamental to cardiac diagnostics, providing noninvasive insights into cardiovascular conditions. Recent advancements in deep learning have led to foundation models (FMs) capable of learning powerful representations of ECG signals. However, these models often fail to fully exploit the periodic nature and diagnostic frequency bands of ECGs, leading to inefficiencies in computational cost and interpretability. We propose a novel ECG foundation model that learns nested embeddings, where each subset of dimensions encodes progressively higher-frequency information. By explicitly modeling frequency structures and applying a correlation penalty, the method achieves compact, high-rank representations that reduce model size without sacrificing performance. We evaluate our approach on two large-scale datasets for embedding redundancy and prediction performance on downstream clinical tasks such as arrhythmia classification, and cardiac condition detection. We observe similar prediction performance AUROC scores and lower embedding redundancy, offering a computationally efficient and interpretable framework for ECG analysis. Finally, the representations obtained from our model in UK Biobank data capture known cardiovascular variants and detect novel loci, which can be applied to drug discovery. View details AI mirrors experimental science to uncover a novel mechanism of gene transfer crucial to bacterial evolution Juro Gottweis Alan Karthikesalingam Wei-Hung Weng Anil Palepu Jose R Penades Alexander Daryin Artiom Myaskovsky Annalisa Pawlosky Tiago R D Costa Tao Tu Cell (2025) Preview Preview abstract Note this is a re-submission of a previously approved ITP. The previous approval was conditional for a journal pre-sub enquiry only and we are submitting a new ITP for the preprint of the paper. AI models have been proposed for hypothesis generation, but testing their ability to drive high-impact research is challenging, since an AI-generated hypothesis can take decades to validate. Here, we challenge the ability of a recently developed LLM-based platform to generate high-level hypotheses by posing a question that took years to resolve experimentally but remained unpublished: How could capsid-forming phage-inducible chromosomal islands (cf-PICIs) spread across bacterial species? Remarkably, the AI’s top- ranked hypothesis matched our experimentally confirmed mechanism: cf-PICIs hijack diverse phage tails to expand their host range. We critically assess the AI’s five highest- ranked hypotheses, showing that some opened new research avenues in our laboratories. We benchmark its performance against other LLMs and outline best practices for integrating AI into scientific discovery. Our findings suggest that AI can act not just as a computational tool, but as a creative engine, accelerating discovery and reshaping how we generate and test scientific hypotheses. View details Balls-and-Bins Sampling for DP-SGD Lynn Chua Badih Ghazi Charlie Harrison Pritish Kamath Ravi Kumar Ethan Leeman Pasin Manurangsi Amer Sinha Chiyuan Zhang AISTATS (2025) Preview Preview abstract We introduce the Balls-and-Bins sampling for differentially private (DP) optimization methods such as DP-SGD. While it has been common practice to use some form of shuffling in DP-SGD implementations, privacy accounting algorithms have typically assumed that Poisson subsampling is used instead. Recent work by Chua et al. (2024) however pointed out that shuffling based DP-SGD can have a much larger privacy cost in practical regime of parameters. We show that the Balls-and-Bins sampling achieves the “best-of-both” samplers, namely, the implementation of Balls-and-Bins sampling is similar to that of Shuffling and models trained with Balls-and-Bins based DP-SGD achieve utility comparable to those trained with Shuffle based DP-SGD at the same noise multiplier, and yet, Balls-and-Bins sampling enjoys similar-or-better privacy amplification as compared to Poisson subsampling. View details Approximate Differential Privacy of the l_2 Mechanism Matthew Joseph Alex Kulesza Alex Yu 2025 Preview Preview abstract We study the $\ell_2$ mechanism for computing a $d$-dimensional statistic with bounded $\ell_2$ sensitivity under approximate differential privacy. Across a range of privacy parameters, we find that the $\ell_2$ mechanism obtains error approaching that of the Laplace mechanism as $d \to 1$ and approaching that of the Gaussian mechanism as $d \to \infty$; however, it dominates both in between. View details 17 18 19 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
