 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 526 - 540 of 676 publications chip template Remove Generalized Top-k Mallows Model for Ranked Choices Sara Ahmadian Shahrzad Haddadan 2025 Preview Preview abstract The classic Mallows model is a foundational tool for modeling user preferences. However, it has limitations in capturing real-world scenarios, where users often focus only on a limited set of preferred items and are indifferent to the rest. To address this, extensions such as the top-k Mallows model have been proposed, aligning better with practical applications. In this paper, we address several challenges related to the generalized top-k Mallows model, with a focus on analyzing buyer choices. Our key contributions are: (1) a novel sampling scheme tailored to generalized top-k Mallows models, (2) an efficient algorithm for computing choice probabilities under this model, and (3) an active learning algorithm for estimating the model parameters from observed choice data. These contributions provide new tools for analysis and prediction in critical decision-making scenarios. We present a rigorous mathematical analysis for the performance of our algorithms. Furthermore, through extensive experiments on synthetic data and real-world data, we demonstrate the scalability and accuracy of our proposed methods, and we compare the predictive power of Mallows model for top-k lists compared to the simpler Multinomial Logit model. View details Existence of Deadlock-Free Routing for Arbitrary Networks Yossi Matias Uri Mendlovic 2025 Preview Preview abstract Given a network of routing nodes, represented as a directed graph, we prove the following necessary and sufficient condition for the existence of deadlock-free message routing: The directed graph must contain two edge-disjoint directed trees rooted at the same node, one tree directed into the root node and the other directed away from the root node. While the sufficiency of this condition is known, its necessity, to the best of our knowledge, has not been previously recognized or proven. Although not directly applicable to the construction of deadlock-free routing schemes, this result provides a fundamental insight into the nature of deadlock-free networks and may lead to the development of improved tools for designing and verifying such schemes. View details A Implies B: Circuit Analysis in LLMs for Propositional Logical Reasoning Rina Panigrahy Guanzhe Hong Xin Wang Enming Luo Cyrus Rashtchian Nishanth Dikkala Arun Kandoor 2025 Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable performance in tasks that require reasoning abilities. Motivated by recent works showing evidence of LLMs being able to plan and reason on abstract reasoning problems in context, we conduct a set of controlled experiments on a synthetic propositional logic problem to provide a mechanistic understanding of how such abilities arise. In particular, for a decoder-only transformer trained solely on our synthetic dataset, we identify the specific mechanisms by which a three-layer Transformer solves the reasoning task. In particular, we identify certain ``planning'' and reasoning circuits which require cooperation between the attention blocks to in totality implement the desired reasoning algorithm. We also find that deeper models with greater number of attention heads exhibit a stronger performance on solving more complex variants of our logic problem. View details Addax: Utilizing Zeroth-Order Gradients to Improve Memory Efficiency and Performance of SGD for Fine-Tuning Language Models Zeman Li Xinwei Zhang Peilin Zhong Yuan Deng Meisam Razaviyayn Vahab Mirrokni ICLR (2025) Preview Preview abstract Fine-tuning language models (LMs) with the Adam optimizer often demands excessive memory, limiting accessibility. The "in-place" version of Stochastic Gradient Descent (IP-SGD) and Memory-Efficient Zeroth-order Optimizer (MeZO) have been proposed to address this. However, IP-SGD still requires substantial memory, and MeZO suffers from slow convergence and degraded final performance due to its zeroth-order nature. This paper introduces Addax, a novel method that improves both memory efficiency and performance of IP-SGD by integrating it with MeZO. Specifically, Addax computes zeroth- or first-order gradients of data points in the minibatch based on their memory consumption, combining these gradient estimates to update directions. By computing zeroth-order gradients for data points that require more memory and first-order gradients for others, Addax overcomes the slow convergence of MeZO and the excessive memory requirement of IP-SGD. Additionally, the zeroth-order gradient acts as a regularizer for the first-order gradient, further enhancing the model's final performance. Theoretically, we establish the convergence of Addax under mild assumptions, demonstrating faster convergence and less restrictive hyper-parameter choices than MeZO. Our experiments with diverse LMs and tasks show that Addax consistently outperforms MeZO regarding accuracy and convergence speed while having a comparable memory footprint. When fine-tuning OPT-13B with one A100 GPU, on average, Addax outperforms MeZO in accuracy/F1 score by 14% and runs 15x faster while using memory similar to MeZO. In our experiments on the larger OPT-30B model, on average, Addax outperforms MeZO in terms of accuracy/F1 score by >16 and runs 30x faster on a single H100 GPU. Moreover, Addax surpasses the performance of standard fine-tuning approaches, such as IP-SGD and Adam, in most tasks with significantly less memory requirement. View details Unveiling the Limits of Deep Learning Models in Hydrological Extrapolation Tasks Ralf Loritz Andras Bardossy Sanika Baste Eduardo Acuna Espinoza Daniel Klotz Hydrology and Earth System Sciences (2025) Preview Preview abstract Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) networks have shown strong performance in rainfall–-runoff modelling, often surpassing conventional hydrological models in benchmark studies. However, recent studies raise questions about their ability to extrapolate, particularly under extreme conditions that exceed the range of their training data. This study examines the performance of a stand-alone LSTM trained on 196 catchments in Switzerland when subjected to synthetic design precipitation events of increasing intensity and varying duration. The model’s response is compared to that of a hybrid model and evaluated against hydrological process understanding. Our study reiterates that the stand-alone LSTM is not capable of predicting discharge values above a theoretical limit, and we show that this limit (74 mm d$^{-1}$) is below the range of the data the model was trained on (183 mm d$^{-1}$ when trained on CAMELS-CH). Furthermore, the LSTM exhibits a concave runoff response under extreme precipitation, indicating that event runoff coefficients decrease with increasing design precipitation--—a phenomenon not observed in the hybrid model used as a benchmark. We show that saturation of the LSTM cell states alone does not fully account for this characteristic behavior, as the LSTM does not reach full saturation, particularly for the 1-day events. Instead, its gating structures prevent new information about the current extreme precipitation from being incorporated into the cell states. Adjusting the LSTM architecture, for instance, by increasing the number of hidden states, and/or using a larger, more diverse training dataset can help mitigate the problem. However, these adjustments do not guarantee improved extrapolation performance, and the LSTM continues to predict values below the range of the training data or show unfeasible runoff responses during the 1-day design experiments. Despite these shortcomings, our findings highlight the inherent potential of stand-alone LSTMs to capture complex hydro-meteorological relationships. We argue that more robust training strategies and model configurations could address the observed limitations, preserving the promise of stand-alone LSTMs for rainfall–-runoff modelling. View details Exploring Soil Moisture Dynamics and Variability across Scales and Geological settings using Gaussian Mixture-Long Short-Term Memory Networks Ralf Loritz Erwin Zehe Daniel Klotz Hoshin Gupta Balazs Bischof Journal of Hydrology (2025) Preview Preview abstract The paper is a simple application paper that explores the use of mixture density networks for modeling coupled soil moisture sensors. In the following I attached the abstract of the paper. ## Abstract Soil moisture is a key variable for a range of hydrological and ecological processes, yet capturing its small-scale variability and preferential flow phenomena remains challenging. Recent advancements in deep learning have demonstrated potential in predicting hydrological variables, but conventional data-driven models often struggle to represent small-scale variability effectively. In this study, we integrate Long-Short Term Memory (LSTMs) networks and Gaussian Mixture Models (GMMs) to simulate soil moisture dynamics while explicitly quantifying its associated variability. Unlike deterministic approaches, our probabilistic framework accounts for nonlinear relationships between inputs and outputs while modeling the inherent small-scale variability in soil moisture. We apply this methodology to an in-situ soil moisture dataset from the Attert experimental basin, where the experimental design clusters three soil moisture profiles for each location and depth, providing an ideal framework for examining small-scale variability of soil moisture across distinct geological and pedological settings. Our results demonstrate that the proposed model effectively reproduces soil moisture dynamics across multiple depths and scales, achieving an average Kling-Gupta Efficiency (KGE) of 0.52, Rank Correlation of 0.72, and Root Mean Squared Error of 0.036 m3m-3, while also capturing the key aspects of small-scale variability and sensor uncertainty. Furthermore, the modeled distributions offer new insights into the spatiotemporal structure of soil moisture and underscore the value of probabilistic modeling in hydrological approaches. By explicitly incorporating small-scale variability into the modeling process, our approach enhances both the interpretability and reliability of soil moisture predictions. While LSTMs effectively capture temporal dynamics, our findings underscore the necessity of incorporating variability quantification to improve model accuracy and generalization. This study highlights the potential of probabilistic deep learning frameworks in hydrological modeling and supports their broader application for improved soil moisture estimation and variability assessment. View details Parallelising Lazy Clause Generation with Trail Sharing Toby Davies Frédéric Didier Laurent Perron Peter J Stuckey Integration of Constraint Programming, Artificial Intelligence, and Operations Research (CPAIOR 2025), Springer Nature Switzerland, Cham, pp. 205-221 Preview Preview abstract We investigate the effectiveness of splitting the search space in parallelising the state-of-the-art CP-SAT solver. One of the key barriers to effective search-space splitting in learning solvers is the generated sub-problems are not independent, leading to substantial communication-related overhead, substantial redundant work, or both. Our contributions attempt to mitigate this issue: job reassignment; and trail sharing. Jobs (sub-trees) are reassigned to new workers if the clause database of the currently assigned worker appears ill-suited to the region of the search-space, when doing so workers can share some of the state from their local trail. We argue a trail prefix can be viewed as a lossy compressed representation of much of the relevant information a worker has learnt about a job, this information can be exploited by the next worker assigned the same subtree to avoid some redundant work. We show these approaches complement standard portfolio and clause-sharing approaches, improving CP-SAT’s performance on MiniZinc challenge benchmarks with a moderate number of worker threads. To enable these approaches, we also introduce “Buffered Work Stealing,” which can be parameterised to emulate the two main existing approaches to search-space splitting in the literature: Work Stealing and Embarassingly Parallel Search, as well as an intermediate configuration between these two extremes that slightly outperforms both. View details DialogLab: Authoring, Simulating, and Testing Dynamic Group Conversations in Hybrid Human-AI Conversations Erzhen Hu Yanhe Chen Mingyi Li Vrushank Phadnis Pingmei Xu Xun Qian Alex Olwal David Kim Seongkook Heo Ruofei Du Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, ACM (2025), 210:1-20 Preview Preview abstract Designing compelling multi-party conversations involving both humans and AI agents presents significant challenges, particularly in balancing scripted structure with emergent, human-like interactions. We introduce DialogLab, a prototyping toolkit for authoring, simulating, and testing hybrid human-AI dialogues. DialogLab provides a unified interface to configure conversational scenes, define agent personas, manage group structures, specify turn-taking rules, and orchestrate transitions between scripted narratives and improvisation. Crucially, DialogLab allows designers to introduce controlled deviations from the script—through configurable agents that emulate human unpredictability—to systematically probe how conversations adapt and recover. DialogLab facilitates rapid iteration and evaluation of complex, dynamic multi-party human-AI dialogues. An evaluation with both end users and domain experts demonstrates that DialogLab supports efficient iteration and structured verification, with applications in training, rehearsal, and research on social dynamics. Our findings show the value of integrating real-time, human-in-the-loop improvisation with structured scripting to support more realistic and adaptable multi-party conversation design. View details Bi-NAS: Towards Effective and Personalized Explanation for Recommender Systems via Bi-Level Neural Architecture Search Longfeng Wu Yao Zhou Tong Zeng Zhimin Peng Bhanu Pratap Singh Rawat Lecheng Zheng Giovanni Seni Dawei Zhou 2025 Preview Preview abstract Recommender systems are vital in helping users navigate vast amounts of information, offering personalized suggestions and effective explanations for these recommendations. While previous efforts have attempted to provide such explanations, evaluating their effectiveness across various scenarios remains a challenge. Enhancing these explanations is essential for improving user engagement, trust, and decision-making. To facilitate effective explanations within the recommender system, we propose a Bi-level Neural Architecture Search (Bi-NAS) framework to optimize explanations. This approach simultaneously refines cross-attention mechanisms and feature interaction functions by exploring both intra-layer and inter-layer design spaces. Furthermore, we integrate Large Language Models (LLMs) to enhance explanation generation, leveraging zero-shot prompting to produce more effective and personalized justifications. By aligning user feature preferences with item quality scores, our approach ensures that explanations reflect both user intent and item attributes, improving transparency and reasoning depth. Extensive evaluations on four real-world datasets demonstrate that Bi-NAS not only boosts recommendation accuracy but also significantly improves the effectiveness of explanations for the recommender systems, providing users with clear and reliable insights into the suggestions they receive. View details Stochastic facility location problems with outsourcing costs Javiera Barrera Eduardo Moreno Ivana Ljubic (2025) Preview Preview abstract Stochastic facility location problems with outsourcing costs (SFLPOC) optimize facility placement and customer assignment under demand uncertainty. Excess demand beyond the capacity of a facility incurs outsourcing costs. This work addresses SFLPOC, aiming to minimize overall expected costs (placement, service and outsourcing). We model SFLPOC as a two-stage stochastic program. While prior work focused on specific assumptions or small scenario sets, we present methods suitable for general probability distributions. For discrete scenario sets, we improve upon classic Benders decomposition by exploiting the second-stage subproblem’s structure. To handle general distributions, we partition the probability space based on incumbent integer solutions. Coupled with Benders cuts, this provides an exact solution method for common distributions (e.g. Bernoulli, Exponential, Poisson, Gaussian). Additionally, we introduce a compact formulation specifically for i.i.d. demand distributions, allowing us to solve even continuous distribution problems to optimality. Computational experiments on established benchmarks demonstrate that our compact formulation consistently finds optimal solutions, while the Benders approach provides strong solutions with proven optimality gaps for general distributions, outperforming sample average approximations. View details Acceleration for Distributed Transshipment and Parallel Maximum Flow Grunau Christoph Goran Žužić Rasmus Kyng 2025 Preview Preview abstract We combine several recent advancements to solve $(1+\varepsilon)$-transshipment and $(1+\varepsilon)$-maximum flow with a parallel algorithm with $\tilde{O}(1/\varepsilon)$ depth and $\tilde{O}(m/\varepsilon)$ work. We achieve this by developing and deploying suitable parallel linear cost approximators in conjunction with an accelerated continuous optimization framework known as the box-simplex game by Jambulapati et al. (ICALP 2022). A linear cost approximator is a linear operator that allows us to efficiently estimate the cost of the optimal solution to a given routing problem. Obtaining accelerated $\varepsilon$ dependencies for both problems requires developing a stronger multicommodity cost approximator, one where cancellations between different commodities are disallowed. For maximum flow, we observe that a recent linear cost approximator due to Agarwal et al. (SODA 2024) can be augmented with additional parallel operations and achieve $\varepsilon^{-1}$ dependency via the box-simplex game. For transshipment, we also obtain construct a deterministic and distributed approximator. This yields a deterministic CONGEST algorithm that requires $\tilde{O}(\varepsilon^{-1}(D + \sqrt{n}))$ rounds on general networks of hop diameter $D$ and $\tilde{O}(\varepsilon^{-1}D)$ rounds on minor-free networks to compute a $(1+\varepsilon)$-approximation. View details Olympiad-Level Formal Mathematical Reasoning with Reinforcement Learning Thomas Hubert Rishi Mehta Laurent Sartran Miklós Z. Horváth Goran Žužić Eric Wieser Aja Huang Julian Schrittwieser Yannick Schroecker Hussain Masoom Ottavia Bertolli Tom Zahavy Amol Mandhane Jessica Yung Iuliya Beloshapka Borja Ibarz Vivek Veeriah Lei Yu Oliver Nash Paul Lezeau Salvatore Mercuri Calle Sönne Bhavik Mehta Alex Davies Daniel Zheng Fabian Pedregosa Yin Li Ingrid von Glehn Mark Rowland Samuel Albanie Ameya Velingker Simon Schmitt Edward Lockhart Henryk Michalewski Nicolas Sonnerat Demis Hassabis Pushmeet Kohli David Silver Nature (2025) Preview Preview abstract A long-standing goal of artificial intelligence is to build systems capable of complex reasoning in vast domains, a task epitomized by mathematics with its boundless concepts and demand for rigorous proof. Recent AI systems, often reliant on human data, typically lack the formal verification necessary to guarantee correctness. By contrast, formal languages such as Lean1 offer an interactive environment that grounds reasoning, and reinforcement learning (RL) provides a mechanism for learning in such environments. We present AlphaProof, an AlphaZero-inspired2 agent that learns to find formal proofs through RL by training on millions of auto-formalized problems. For the most difficult problems, it uses Test-Time RL, a method of generating and learning from millions of related problem variants at inference time to enable deep, problem-specific adaptation. AlphaProof substantially improves state-of-the-art results on historical mathematics competition problems. At the 2024 IMO competition, our AI system, with AlphaProof as its core reasoning engine, solved three out of the five non-geometry problems, including the competition’s most difficult problem. Combined with AlphaGeometry 23, this performance, achieved with multi-day computation, resulted in reaching a score equivalent to that of a silver medallist, marking the first time an AI system achieved any medal-level performance. Our work demonstrates that learning at scale from grounded experience produces agents with complex mathematical reasoning strategies, paving the way for a reliable AI tool in complex mathematical problem-solving. View details Coupled Fire-Cloud Simulations Reveal Attenuation and Self-Intensification Mechanisms of Pyrocumulonimbus Clouds Qing Wang Sheide Chammas Rob Carver Matthias Ihme Yi-fan Chen John Anderson Tapio Schneider Cenk Gazen Jeff Parker (2025) Preview Preview abstract Pyrocumulonimbus (pyroCb) firestorms, which inject climate-altering aerosols into the stratosphere, represent a growing and unpredictable hazard in an era of increasing wildfire activity. The complex fire-atmosphere feedbacks that govern their behavior, however, are poorly understood, limiting forecasting capabilities. Here we use high-fidelity, fully coupled simulations to dissect the competing mechanisms controlling pyroCb evolution. We show that fuel moisture primarily acts as an energy sink that attenuates fire intensity and suppresses pyroCb development, rather than serving as a significant moisture source for the cloud itself. Conversely, we identify a potent positive feedback loop, the Self-Amplifying Fire-induced Recirculation (SAFIR) mechanism, where precipitation-induced downdrafts intensify the parent fire. Our simulations reveal that the prevalence of either attenuation or SAFIR-driven intensification is dictated by ambient conditions, particularly wind speed. These findings provide a new mechanistic framework for understanding pyroCb behavior, offering a critical step toward improved prediction of these extreme events. View details LiPO: Listwise Preference Optimization through Learning-to-Rank Tianqi Liu Zhen Qin Junru Wu Jiaming Shen Misha Khalman Rishabh Joshi Yao Zhao Mohammad Saleh Simon Baumgartner Jialu Liu Peter Liu Xuanhui Wang NAACL (2025) Preview Preview abstract Aligning language models (LMs) with curated human feedback is critical to control their behaviors in real-world applications. Several recent policy optimization methods, such as DPO and SLiC, serve as promising alternatives to the traditional Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) approach. In practice, human feedback often comes in a format of a ranked list over multiple responses to amortize the cost of reading prompt. Multiple responses can also be ranked by reward models or AI feedback. There lacks such a thorough study on directly fitting upon a list of responses. In this work, we formulate the LM alignment as a listwise ranking problem and describe the LiPO framework, where the policy can potentially learn more effectively from a ranked list of plausible responses given the prompt. This view draws an explicit connection to Learning-to-Rank (LTR), where most existing preference optimization work can be mapped to existing ranking objectives. Following this connection, we provide an examination of ranking objectives that are not well studied for LM alignment, with DPO and SLiC as special cases when list size is two. In particular, we highlight a specific method, LiPO-𝜆, which leverages a state-of-the-art listwise ranking objective and weights each preference pair in a more advanced manner. We show that LiPO-𝜆 can outperform DPO variants and SLiC by a clear margin on several preference alignment tasks with both curated and real rankwise preference data. View details Relying on the Metrics of Evaluated Agents Serena Wang Michael Jordan Katrina Ligett Preston McAfee The ACM Web Conference (WWW) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Online platforms and regulators face a continuing problem of designing effective evaluation metrics. While tools for collecting and processing data continue to progress, this has not addressed the problem of unknown unknowns, or fundamental informational limitations on part of the evaluator. To guide the choice of metrics in the face of this informational problem, we turn to the evaluated agents themselves, who may have more information about how to measure their own outcomes. We model this interaction as an agency game, where we ask: When does an agent have an incentive to reveal the observability of a metric to their evaluator? We show that an agent will prefer to reveal metrics that differentiate the most difficult tasks from the rest, and conceal metrics that differentiate the easiest. We further show that the agent can prefer to reveal a metric *garbled* with noise over both fully concealing and fully revealing. This indicates an economic value to privacy that yields Pareto improvement for both the agent and evaluator. We demonstrate these findings on data from online rideshare platforms. View details 36 37 38 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
