 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 361 - 375 of 676 publications chip template Remove Not Like Us, Hunty: Measuring Perceptions and Behavioral Effects of Minoritized Anthropomorphic Cues in LLMs Jeffrey Basoah Daniel Chechelnitsky Tao Long Katharina Reinecke Chrysoula Zerva Kaitlyn Zhou Mark Díaz Maarten Sap Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, ACM (2025), pp. 710-745 Preview Preview abstract As large language models (LLMs) increasingly adapt and personalize to diverse sets of users, there is an increased risk of systems appropriating sociolects, i.e., language styles or dialects that are associated with specific minoritized lived experiences (e.g., African American English, Queer slang). In this work, we examine whether sociolect usage by a LLM agent affects user reliance on its outputs and user perception (satisfaction, frustration, trust, and social presence). We designed and conducted user studies where 498 African American English (AAE) speakers and 487 Queer slang speakers performed a set of question-answering tasks with LLM-based suggestions in either standard American English (SAE) or their self-identified sociolect. Our findings showed that sociolect usage by LLMs influenced both reliance and perceptions, though in some surprising ways. Results suggest that both AAE and Queer slang speakers relied more on the SAELM, and had more positive perceptions of the SAELM. Yet, only Queer slang speakers felt more social presence from the QSLM over the SAE one, whereas only AAE speakers preferred and trusted the SAELM over the AAE one. These findings emphasize the need to test for behavioral outcomes rather than simply assume that personalization would lead to a better and safer reliance outcome. They also highlight the nuanced dynamics of minoritized language in machine interactions, underscoring the need for LLMs to be carefully designed to respect cultural and linguistic boundaries while fostering genuine user engagement and trust. View details Mastering Multiple-Expert Routing: Realizable H-Consistency and Strong Guarantees for Learning to Defer Anqi Mao Mehryar Mohri Yutao Zhong Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2025) Preview Preview abstract The problem of learning to defer with multiple experts consists of optimally assigning input instances to experts, balancing the trade-off between their accuracy and computational cost. This is a critical challenge in natural language generation, but also in other fields such as image processing, and medical diagnostics. Recent studies have proposed surrogate loss functions to optimize deferral, but challenges remain in ensuring their consistency properties. This paper introduces novel surrogate loss functions and efficient algorithms with strong theoretical learning guarantees. We address open questions regarding realizable $H$-consistency, $H$-consistency bounds, and Bayes-consistency for both single-stage (jointly learning predictor and deferral function) and two-stage (learning only the deferral function with a fixed expert) learning scenarios. For single-stage deferral, we introduce a family of new realizable $H$-consistent surrogate losses and further prove $H$-consistency for a selected member. For two-stage deferral, we derive new surrogate losses that achieve realizable $H$-consistency, $H$-consistency bounds, and Bayes-consistency for the two-expert scenario and, under natural assumptions, multiple-expert scenario. Additionally, we provide enhanced theoretical guarantees under low-noise assumptions for both scenarios. Finally, we report the results of experiments using our proposed surrogate losses, comparing their performance against existing baselines. View details Bipartite Ranking From Multiple Labels: On Loss Versus Label Aggregation Michal Lukasik Lin Chen Hari Narasimhan Aditya Menon Wittawat Jitkrittum Felix Yu Sashank Reddi Thomas Fu Mohammad "Hossein" Bateni Sanjiv Kumar 2025 Preview Preview abstract Bipartite ranking is a fundamental supervised learning problem, with the goal of learning a ranking over instances with maximal area under the ROC curve (AUC) against a single binary target label. However, one may often observe multiple binary target labels, e.g., from distinct human annotators. How can one synthesize such labels into a single coherent ranking? In this work, we formally analyze two approaches to this problem—loss aggregation and label aggregation—by characterizing their Bayes-optimal solutions. We show that while both approaches can yield Pareto-optimal solutions, loss aggregation can exhibit label dictatorship: one can inadvertently (and undesirably) favor one label over others. This suggests that label aggregation can be preferable to loss aggregation, which we empirically verify. View details Probing non-equilibrium topological order on a quantum processor Melissa Will Tyler Cochran Eliott Rosenberg Bernhard Jobst Pedram Roushan Michael Knap Adam Gammon-Smith Frank Pollmann Nature, 645 (2025), 348–353 Preview Preview abstract Out-of-equilibrium phases in many-body systems constitute a new paradigm in quantum matter—they exhibit dynamical properties that may otherwise be forbidden by equilibrium thermodynamics. Among these non-equilibrium phases are periodically driven (Floquet) systems, which are generically difficult to simulate classically because of their high entanglement. Here we realize a Floquet topologically ordered state on an array of superconducting qubits. We image the characteristic dynamics of its chiral edge modes and characterize its emergent anyonic excitations. Devising an interferometric algorithm allows us to introduce and measure a bulk topological invariant to probe the dynamical transmutation of anyons for system sizes up to 58 qubits. Our work demonstrates that quantum processors can provide key insights into the thus-far largely unexplored landscape of highly entangled non-equilibrium phases of matter. View details Junction and inductor models in ADS Ofer Naaman arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract This note is a follow up to Ref. [Naaman, IEEE TAS 2025], describing how to construct Josephson junction, inductor, and mutual inductance models using components that are available in the Keysight ADS core library. View details Escaping Collapse: The Strength of Weak Data for Large Language Model Training Kareem Amin Sara Babakniya Alex Bie William Kong Sergei Vassilvitskii Umar Syed Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38 (NeurIPS 2025) Preview Preview abstract Synthetically-generated data plays an increasingly larger role in training large language models. However, while synthetic data has been found to be useful, studies have also shown that without proper curation it can cause LLM performance to plateau, or even "collapse", after many training iterations. In this paper, we formalize this question and develop a theoretical framework to investigate how much curation is needed in order to ensure that LLM performance continually improves. Our analysis is inspired by boosting, a classic machine learning technique that leverages a very weak learning algorithm to produce an arbitrarily good classifier. The approach we analyze subsumes many recently proposed methods for training LLMs on synthetic data, and thus our analysis sheds light on why they are successful, and also suggests opportunities for future improvement. We present experiments that validate our theory, and show that dynamically focusing labeling resources on the most challenging examples --- in much the same way that boosting focuses the efforts of the weak learner --- leads to improved performance. View details Addax: Utilizing Zeroth-Order Gradients to Improve Memory Efficiency and Performance of SGD for Fine-Tuning Language Models Zeman Li Xinwei Zhang Peilin Zhong Yuan Deng Meisam Razaviyayn Vahab Mirrokni 2025 Preview Preview abstract Fine-tuning language models (LMs) with the standard Adam optimizer often demands excessive memory, limiting accessibility. The "in-place" version of Stochastic Gradient Descent (IP-SGD) and Memory-Efficient Zeroth-order Optimizer (MeZO) have been proposed as solutions to improve memory efficiency. However, IP-SGD still requires a decent amount of memory, and MeZO suffers from slow convergence and degraded final performance due to its zeroth-order nature. This paper introduces Addax, a novel method that improves both memory efficiency and algorithm performance of IP-SGD by integrating it with MeZO. Specifically, Addax computes the zeroth-order or first-order gradient of the data points in the mini-batch based on their memory consumption and combines zeroth- and first-order gradient estimates to obtain the updated direction in each step. By computing the zeroth-order order gradient of data points that require more memory and the first-order gradient of the ones that require less memory, Addax overcomes the slow convergence of MeZO and excessive memory requirement of IP-SGD. Additionally, the zeroth-order gradient acts as a regularizer for the first-order gradient, further enhancing the model's final performance. Theoretically, we establish the convergence of Addax under mild assumptions, demonstrating faster convergence and less restrictive hyperparameter choices than MeZO. Our extensive experiments with diverse LMs and tasks show that Addax consistently outperforms MeZO in terms of accuracy and convergence speed, while having a comparable memory footprint. In particular, our experiments using one A100 GPU on OPT-13B model reveal that, on average, Addax outperforms MeZO in terms of accuracy/F1 score by 14%, and runs 15x faster, while having a comparable memory footprint to MeZO. In our experiments on the larger OPT-30B model, on average, Addax outperforms MeZO in terms of accuracy/F1 score by >16% and runs 30x faster on a single H100 GPU. Moreover, Addax surpasses the performance of standard fine-tuning approaches, such as IP-SGD and Adam, in most tasks in terms of Accuracy/F1 score with significantly less memory requirement. View details PiKE: Adaptive Data Mixing for Large-Scale Multi-Task Learning Under Low Gradient Conflicts Zeman Li Yuan Deng Peilin Zhong Meisam Razaviyayn Vahab Mirrokni 2025 Preview Preview abstract Modern foundation models are trained on diverse datasets to enhance generalization across tasks and domains. A central challenge in this process is determining how to effectively mix and sample data from multiple sources. This naturally leads to a multi-task learning (MTL) perspective. While prior work in MTL has emphasized mitigating gradient conflicts, we observe that large-scale pre-training scenarios-such as multilingual or multi-domain training-often exhibit little to no gradient conflict. Motivated by this observation, we propose PiKE (Positive gradient interaction-based K task weights Estimator), an adaptive data mixing algorithm that dynamically adjusts sampling weights during training. PiKE exploits non-conflicting gradient interactions to minimize a near-tight upper bound on the average loss decrease at each step, while incurring negligible computational overhead. We provide theoretical convergence guarantees and show that PiKE outperforms static and nonadaptive mixing baselines. Furthermore, we extend PiKE to promote balanced learning across tasks. Extensive experiments on large-scale language model pre-training confirm that PiKE achieves faster convergence and improved downstream performance compared to existing approaches. View details TRELLIS: Learning to Compress Key-Value Memory in Attention Models Mahdi Karami Ali Behrouz Praneeth Kacham Vahab Mirrokni 2025 Preview Preview abstract Transformers, while powerful, suffer from quadratic computational complexity and the ever-growing Key-Value (KV) cache of the attention mechanism. This paper introduces Trellis, a novel Transformer architecture with bounded memory that learns how to compress its key-value memory dynamically at test time. Trellis replaces the standard KV cache with a fixed-size memory and train a two-pass recurrent compression mechanism to store new keys and values into memory. To achieve this, it leverages an online gradient descent procedure with a forget gate, enabling the compressed memory to be updated recursively while learning to retain important contextual information from incoming tokens at test time. Extensive experiments on language modeling, common-sense reasoning, recall-intensive tasks, and time series show that the proposed architecture outperforms strong baselines. Notably, its performance gains increase as the sequence length increases, highlighting its potential for long-context applications. View details Balancing the Scales: A Theoretical and Algorithmic Framework for Learning from Imbalanced Data Corinna Cortes Anqi Mao Mehryar Mohri Yutao Zhong Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML 2025) Preview Preview abstract Class imbalance remains a major challenge in machine learning, especially in multi-class problems with long-tailed distributions. Existing methods, such as data resampling, cost-sensitive techniques, and logistic loss modifications, though popular and often effective, lack solid theoretical foundations. As an example, we demonstrate that cost-sensitive methods are not Bayes-consistent. This paper introduces a novel theoretical framework for analyzing generalization in imbalanced classification. We propose a new class-imbalanced margin loss function for both binary and multi-class settings, prove its strong $H$-consistency, and derive corresponding learning guarantees based on empirical loss and a new notion of class-sensitive Rademacher complexity. Leveraging these theoretical results, we devise novel and general learning algorithms, IMMAX (*Imbalanced Margin Maximization*), which incorporate confidence margins and are applicable to various hypothesis sets. While our focus is theoretical, we also present extensive empirical results demonstrating the effectiveness of our algorithms compared to existing baselines. View details Quantifying Cross-Modality Memorization in Vision-Language Models Chiyuan Zhang Badih Ghazi Tom Goldstein Yuxin Wen Yangsibo Huang Ravi Kumar Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) Preview Preview abstract Understanding what and how neural networks memorize during training is crucial, both from the perspective of unintentional memorization of potentially sensitive information and from the standpoint of effective knowledge acquisition for real-world, knowledge-intensive tasks. While previous studies primarily investigate memorization within a single modality, such as text memorization in large language models or image memorization in diffusion models, unified multimodal models are becoming increasingly prevalent in practical applications. In this work, we focus on the unique characteristics of cross-modality memorization and conduct a systematic study centered on vision-language models. To facilitate controlled experiments, we first introduce a synthetic persona dataset comprising diverse synthetic person images and textual descriptions. We quantify factual knowledge memorization and cross-modal transferability by training models on a single modality and evaluating their performance in the other. Our results reveal that facts learned in one modality transfer to the other, but a significant gap exists between recalling information in the source and target modalities. Furthermore, we observe that this gap exists across various scenarios, including more capable models, machine unlearning, and the multi-hop case. At the end, we propose a baseline method to mitigate this challenge. We hope our study can inspire future research on developing more robust multimodal learning techniques to enhance cross-modal transferability. View details Roll the dice & look before you leap: Going beyond the creative limits of next-token prediction Vaishnavh Nagarajan Chen Wu Charles Ding Aditi Raghunathan 2025 Preview Preview abstract We design a suite of minimal algorithmic tasks that are a loose abstraction of open-ended real-world tasks. This allows us to cleanly and controllably quantify the creative limits of the present-day language model. Much like real-world tasks that require a creative, far-sighted leap of thought, our tasks require an implicit, open-ended stochastic planning step that either (a) discovers new connections in an abstract knowledge graph (like in wordplay, drawing analogies, or research) or (b) constructs new patterns (like in designing math problems or new proteins). In these tasks, we empirically and conceptually argue how next-token learning is myopic; multi-token approaches, namely teacherless training and diffusion models, comparatively excel in producing diverse and original output. Secondly, to elicit randomness without hurting coherence, we find that injecting noise at the input layer (dubbed seed-conditioning) works surprisingly as well as (and in some conditions, better than) temperature sampling from the output layer. Thus, our work offers a principled, minimal test-bed for analyzing open-ended creative skills, and offers new arguments for going beyond next-token learning and temperature sampling. View details Improved Balanced Classification with Theoretically Grounded Loss Functions Corinna Cortes Mehryar Mohri Yutao Zhong The Thirty-Ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) Preview Preview abstract The *balanced loss* is a widely adopted objective for multi-class classification under class imbalance. By assigning equal importance to all classes, regardless of their frequency, it promotes fairness and ensures that minority classes are not overlooked. However, directly minimizing the balanced classification loss is typically intractable, which makes the design of effective surrogate losses a central question. This paper introduces and studies two advanced surrogate loss families: Generalized Logit-Adjusted (GLA) loss functions and Generalized Class-Aware weighted (GCA) losses. GLA losses generalize Logit-Adjusted losses, which shift logits based on class priors, to the broader general cross-entropy loss family. GCA loss functions extend the standard class-weighted losses, which scale losses inversely by class frequency, by incorporating class-dependent confidence margins and extending them to the general cross-entropy family. We present a comprehensive theoretical analysis of consistency for both loss families. We show that GLA losses are Bayes-consistent, but only $H$-consistent for unbounded and complete hypothesis sets. Moreover, their $H$-consistency bounds depend inversely on the minimum class probability, scaling at least as $1/\mathsf p _{\min}$. In contrast, GCA losses are $H$-consistent for any hypothesis set that is bounded or complete, with $H$-consistency bounds that scale more favorably as $1/\sqrt{\mathsf p _{\min}}$, offering significantly stronger theoretical guarantees in imbalanced settings. We report the results of experiments demonstrating that, empirically, both the GCA losses with calibrated class-dependent confidence margins and GLA losses can greatly outperform straightforward class-weighted losses as well as the LA losses. GLA generally performs slightly better in common benchmarks, whereas GCA exhibits a slight edge in highly imbalanced settings. Thus, we advocate for both GLA and GCA losses as principled, theoretically sound, and state-of-the-art surrogates for balanced classification under class imbalance. View details Faster electronic structure quantum simulation by spectrum amplification Guang Hao Low Robbie King Dominic Berry Qiushi Han Albert Eugene DePrince III Alec White Ryan Babbush Rolando Somma Nicholas Rubin Physical Review X, 15 (2025), pp. 041016 Preview Preview abstract The most advanced techniques using fault-tolerant quantum computers to estimate the ground-state energy of a chemical Hamiltonian involve compression of the Coulomb operator through tensor factorizations, enabling efficient block encodings of the Hamiltonian. A natural challenge of these methods is the degree to which block-encoding costs can be reduced. We address this challenge through the technique of spectral amplification, which magnifies the spectrum of the low-energy states of Hamiltonians that can be expressed as sums of squares. Spectral amplification enables estimating ground-state energies with significantly improved cost scaling in the block encoding normalization factor Λ to just √2⁢Λ⁢𝐸gap, where 𝐸gap ≪Λ is the lowest energy of the sum-of-squares Hamiltonian. To achieve this, we show that sum-of-squares representations of the electronic structure Hamiltonian are efficiently computable by a family of classical simulation techniques that approximate the ground-state energy from below. In order to further optimize, we also develop a novel factorization that provides a trade-off between the two leading Coulomb integral factorization schemes—namely, double factorization and tensor hypercontraction—that when combined with spectral amplification yields a factor of 4 to 195 speedup over the state of the art in ground-state energy estimation for models of iron-sulfur complexes and a CO2-fixation catalyst. View details Life at the Boundary of Chemical Kinetics and Program Execution Thomas Fischbacher Physical Review E (2025) Preview Preview abstract Abstract This work introduces a generic quantitative framework for studying processes that involve interactions of polymer sequences. Possible applications range from quantitative studies of the reaction kinetics of polymerization processes to explorations of the behavior of chemical implementations of computational - including basic life-like - processes. This way, we establish a bridge between thermodynamic and computational aspects of systems that are defined in terms of sequence interactions. As a by-product of these investigations, we clarify some common confusion around the notion of ``autocatalysis''. Using a Markov process model of polymer sequence composition and dynamical evolution of the Markov process's parameters via an ODE that arises when taking the double ``chemical'' many-particle limit as well as ``rarefied interactions'' limit, this approach enables - for example - accurate quantitative explorations of entropy generation in systems where computation is driven by relaxation to thermodynamic equilibrium. The computational framework internally utilizes the Scheme programming language's intrinsic continuation mechanisms to provide nondeterministic evaluation primitives that allow the user to specify example systems in straight purely functional code, making exploration of all possible relevant sequence composition constellations - which would be otherwise tedious to write code for - automatic and hidden from the user. As the original motivation for this work came from investigations into emergent program evolution that arises in computational substrates of the form discussed in recent work on ``Computational Life'' \cite{alakuijala2024computational}, a major focus of attention is on giving a deeper explanation of key requirements for the possible emergence of self-replicators especially in settings whose behavior is governed by real world physics rather than ad-hoc rules that may be difficult to implement in a physical system. A collection of fully worked out examples elucidate how this modeling approach is quantitatively related to Metropolis Monte Carlo based simulations as well as exact or approximate analytic approaches, and how it can be utilized to study a broad range of different systems. These examples can also serve as starting points for further explorations. View details 25 26 27 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
