 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 46 - 60 of 676 publications chip template Remove Zero-Shot Image Moderation in Google Ads with LLM-Assisted Textual Descriptions and Cross-modal Co-embeddings Jimin Li Eric Xiao Wei Qiao Katie Warren Enming Luo Krishna Viswanathan Ariel Fuxman Yuan Wang Bill Li Yintao Liu (2025) Preview Preview abstract We present a scalable and agile approach for ads image content moderation at Google, addressing the challenges of moderating massive volumes of ads with diverse content and evolving policies. The proposed method utilizes human-curated textual descriptions and cross-modal text-image co-embeddings to enable zero-shot classification of policy violating ads images, bypassing the need for extensive supervised training data and human labeling. By leveraging large language models (LLMs) and user expertise, the system generates and refines a comprehensive set of textual descriptions representing policy guidelines. During inference, co-embedding similarity between incoming images and the textual descriptions serves as a reliable signal for policy violation detection, enabling efficient and adaptable ads content moderation. Evaluation results demonstrate the efficacy of this framework in significantly boosting the detection of policy violating content. View details TOKENFORMER: Rethinking Transformers Scaling with Tokenized Model Parameters Haiyang Wang Fan Yue Ferjad Naeem Yongqin Xian Jan Eric Lenssen Liwei Wang Federico Tombari Bernt Schiele 2025 Preview Preview abstract Transformers have become the predominant architecture in foundation models due to their excellent performance across various domains. However, the substantial cost of scaling these models remains a significant concern. This problem arises primarily from their dependence on fixed parameters within linear projections, especially when architectural modifications (e.g., channel dimensions) are introduced. Each scaling iteration typically requires retraining the entire model from the beginning, leading to suboptimal utilization of computational resources. To overcome this limitation, we introduce TokenFormer, a naturally scalable architecture that leverages the attention mechanism exclusively for computations among input tokens and interactions between input tokens and model parameters, thereby enhancing architectural flexibility. By treating model parameters as tokens, we replace all the linear projections in Transformer with our token-parameter attention layer, where input tokens act as queries and model parameters as keys and values. This innovative approach allows for progressive and efficient scaling without necessitating retraining from scratch. Our model scales from 124 million to 1.4 billion parameters by incrementally adding new key-value parameters, achieving performance comparable to models trained from scratch while greatly reducing training costs. Code and models will be publicly available. View details Improving simulation-based origin-destination demand calibration using sample segment counts data Arwa Alanqary Chao Zhang Yechen Li Neha Arora Carolina Osorio The 12th Triennial Symposium on Transportation Analysis conference (TRISTAN XII), Okinawa, Japan (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper introduces a novel approach to demand estimation that utilizes partial observations of segment-level track counts. Building on established simulation-based demand estimation methods, we present a modified formulation that integrates sample track counts as a regularization term. This approach effectively addresses the underdetermination challenge in demand estimation, moving beyond the conventional reliance on a prior OD matrix. The proposed formulation aims to preserve the distribution of the observed track counts while optimizing the demand to align with observed path-level travel times. We tested this approach on Seattle's highway network with various congestion levels. Our findings reveal significant enhancements in the solution quality, particularly in accurately recovering ground truth demand patterns at both the OD and segment levels. View details From Few to Many: Self-Improving Many-Shot Reasoners Through Iterative Optimization and Generation Xingchen Wan Han Zhou Ruoxi Sun Hootan Nakhost Ke Jiang Sercan Arik International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent advances in long-context large language models (LLMs) have led to the emerging paradigm of many-shot in-context learning (ICL), where it is observed that scaling many more demonstrating examples beyond the conventional few-shot setup in the context can lead to performance benefits. However, despite its promise, it is unclear what aspects dominate the benefits and whether simply scaling to more examples is the most effective way of improving many-shot ICL. In this work, we first provide an analysis of the factors driving many-shot ICL, and we find that 1) many-shot performance can still be attributed to often a few disproportionately influential examples and 2) identifying such influential examples ("optimize") and using them as demonstrations to regenerate new examples ("generate") can lead to further improvements. Inspired by the findings, we propose BRIDGE, an algorithm that alternates between the optimize step with Bayesian optimization to discover the influential sets of examples and the generate step to reuse this set to expand the reasoning paths of the examples back to the many-shot regime automatically. On Gemini, Claude, and Mistral LLMs of different sizes, we show that BRIDGE to significant improvements across a diverse set of tasks, including symbolic reasoning, numerical reasoning, and code generation. View details Permission Rationales in the Web Ecosystem: An Exploration of Rationale Text and Design Patterns Yusra Elbitar Soheil Khodayari Marian Harbach Gianluca De Stefano Balazs Engedy Giancarlo Pellegrino Sven Bugiel CHI 2025, ACM Preview Preview abstract Modern web applications rely on features like camera and geolocation for personalized experiences, requiring user permission via browser prompts. To explain these requests, applications provide rationales—contextual information on why permissions are needed. Despite their importance, little is known about how rationales appear on the web or their influence on user decisions. This paper presents the first large-scale study of how the web ecosystem handles permission rationales, covering three areas: (i) identifying webpages that use permissions, (ii) detecting and classifying permission rationales, and (iii) analyzing their attributes to understand their impact on user decisions. We examined over 770K webpages from Chrome telemetry, finding 3.6K unique rationale texts and 749 rationale UIs across 85K pages. We extracted key rationale attributes and assessed their effect on user behavior by cross-referencing them with Chrome telemetry data. Our findings reveal nine key insights, providing the first evidence of how different rationales affect user decisions. View details Differentiable Approximations for Distance Queries Ahmed Abdelkader David M. Mount Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) Preview Preview abstract The widespread use of gradient-based optimization has motivated the adaptation of various classical algorithms into differentiable solvers compatible with learning pipelines. In this paper, we investigate the enhancement of traditional geometric query problems such that the result consists of both the geometric function as well as its gradient. Specifically, we study the fundamental problem of distance queries against a set of points P in R^d, which also underlies various similarity measures for learning algorithms. The main result of this paper is a multiplicative (1+epsilon)-approximation of the Euclidean distance to P which is differentiable at all points in R^d \ P with asymptotically optimal bounds on the norms of its gradient and Hessian, from a data structure with storage and query time matching state-of-the-art results for approximate nearest-neighbor searching. The approximation is realized as a regularized distance through a partition-of-unity framework, which efficiently blends multiple local approximations, over a suitably defined covering of space, into a smooth global approximation. In order to obtain the local distance approximations in a manner that facilitates blending, we develop a new approximate Voronoi diagram based on a simple point-location data structure, simplifying away both the lifting transformation and ray shooting. View details Oculomics: Current Concepts and Evidence Zhuoting Zhu Yueye Wang Ziyi Qi Wenyi Hu Xiayin Zhang Siegfried Wagner Yujie Wang An Ran Ran Joshua Ong Ethan Waisberg Mouayad Masalkhi Alex Suh Yih Chung Tham Carol Y. Cheung Xiaohong Yang Honghua Yu Zongyuan Ge Wei Wang Bin Sheng Yun Liu Andrew G. Lee Alastair Denniston Peter van Wijngaarden Pearse Keane Ching-Yu Cheng Mingguang He Tien Yin Wong Progress in Retinal and Eye Research (2025) Preview Preview abstract The eye provides novel insights into general health, as well as pathogenesis and development of systemic diseases. In the past decade, growing evidence has demonstrated that the eye's structure and function mirror multiple systemic health conditions, especially in cardiovascular diseases, neurodegenerative disorders, and kidney impairments. This has given rise to the field of oculomics- the application of ophthalmic biomarkers to understand mechanisms, detect and predict disease. The development of this field has been accelerated by three major advances: 1) the availability and widespread clinical adoption of high-resolution and non-invasive ophthalmic imaging (“hardware”); 2) the availability of large studies to interrogate associations (“big data”); 3) the development of novel analytical methods, including artificial intelligence (AI) (“software”). Oculomics offers an opportunity to enhance our understanding of the interplay between the eye and the body, while supporting development of innovative diagnostic, prognostic, and therapeutic tools. These advances have been further accelerated by developments in AI, coupled with large-scale linkage datasets linking ocular imaging data with systemic health data. Oculomics also enables the detection, screening, diagnosis, and monitoring of many systemic health conditions. Furthermore, oculomics with AI allows prediction of the risk of systemic diseases, enabling risk stratification, opening up new avenues for prevention or individualized risk prediction and prevention, facilitating personalized medicine. In this review, we summarise current concepts and evidence in the field of oculomics, highlighting the progress that has been made, remaining challenges, and the opportunities for future research. View details Beyond the Phone: Exploring Context-aware Interaction Between Mobile andMixed Reality Devices Fengyuan Zhu Mar Gonzalez Franco Xun Qian Eric Gonzalez David Kim Daniel Kalmar Mahdi Tayarani Ruofei Du 2025 Preview Preview abstract Despite the surge in popularity of virtual reality (VR), mobile phones remain the primary medium for accessing digital content, offering both privacy and portability. This short paper presents Beyond the Phone, a novel framework that enhances mobile phones in VR with context-aware controls and spatial augmentation. We first establish a comprehensive design space through brainstorming and iterative discussions with VR experts. We then develop a proof-of-concept system that analyzes UI layouts to offer context-aware controls and spatial augmentation, targeting six key application areas within our design space. Finally, we demonstrate that our system can effectively adapt to a broad spectrum of applications at runtime, and discuss future directions with reviews with seven experts. View details Enhancing Remote Sensing Representations through Mixed-Modality Masked Autoencoding Ori Linial George Leifman Yochai Blau Nadav Sherman Yotam Gigi Wojciech Sirko Genady Beryozkin Proceedings of the Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) Workshops (2025), pp. 507-516 Preview Preview abstract This paper presents an innovative approach to pre-training models for remote sensing by integrating optical and radar data from Sentinel-2 and Sentinel-1 satellites. Using a novel variation on the masked autoencoder (MAE) framework, our model incorporates a dual-task setup: reconstructing masked Sentinel-2 images and predicting corresponding Sentinel-1 images. This multi-task design enables the encoder to capture both spectral and structural features across diverse environmental conditions. Additionally, we introduce a "mixing" strategy in the pretraining phase, combining patches from both image sources, which mitigates spatial misalignment errors and enhances model robustness. Evaluation on segmentation and classification tasks, including Sen1Floods11 and BigEarthNet, demonstrates significant improvements in adaptability and generalizability across varied downstream remote sensing applications. Our findings highlight the advantages of leveraging complementary modalities for more resilient and versatile land cover analysis. View details SYMBIOSIS: Systems Thinking and Machine Intelligence for Better Outcomes in Society Sameer Sethi Donald Martin Emmanuel Klu Preprint (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper presents SYMBIOSIS, an AI-powered framework to make Systems Thinking accessible for addressing societal challenges and unlock paths for leveraging systems thinking framework to improve AI systems. The platform establishes a centralized, open-source repository of systems thinking/system dynamics models categorized by Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and societal topics using topic modeling and classification techniques. Systems Thinking resources, though critical for articulating causal theories in complex problem spaces, are often locked behind specialized tools and intricate notations, creating high barriers to entry. To address this, we developed a generative co-pilot that translates complex systems representations - such as causal loops and stock-flow diagrams - into natural language (and vice-versa), allowing users to explore and build models without extensive technical training. Rooted in community-based system dynamics (CBSD) and informed by community-driven insights on societal context, we aim to bridge the problem understanding chasm. This gap, driven by epistemic uncertainty, often limits ML developers who lack the community-specific knowledge essential for problem understanding and formulation, often leading to misaligned causal theories and reduced intervention effectiveness. Recent research identifies causal and abductive reasoning as crucial frontiers for AI, and Systems Thinking provides a naturally compatible framework for both. By making Systems Thinking frameworks more accessible and user-friendly, we aim to serve as a foundational step to unlock future research into Responsible and society-centered AI that better integrates societal context leveraging systems thinking framework and models. Our work underscores the need for ongoing research into AI's capacity essential system dynamics such as feedback processes and time delays, paving the way for more socially attuned, effective AI systems. View details I know what I don't know: improving model cascades through confidence tuning Stephan Rabanser Nathalie Rauschmayr Ace Kulshrestha Petra Poklukar Wittawat Jitkrittum Sean Augenstein Congchao Wang Federico Tombari 2025 Preview Preview abstract Large-scale machine learning models deliver strong performance across a wide range of tasks but come with significant computational and resource constraints. To mitigate these challenges, local smaller models are often deployed alongside larger models, relying on routing and deferral mechanisms to offload complex tasks. However, existing approaches inadequately balance the capabilities of these models, often resulting in unnecessary deferrals or sub-optimal resource usage. In this work we introduce a novel loss function called Gatekeeper for calibrating smaller models in cascade setups. Our approach fine-tunes the smaller model to confidently handle tasks it can perform correctly while deferring complex tasks to the larger model. Moreover, it incorporates a mechanism for managing the trade-off between model performance and deferral accuracy, and is broadly applicable across various tasks and domains without any architectural changes. We evaluated our method on encoder-only, decoder-only, and encoder-decoder architectures. Experiments across image classification, language modeling, and vision-language tasks show that our approach substantially improves deferral performance. View details Sufficient Context: A New Lens on Retrieval Augmented Generation Systems Hailey Joren Jianyi Zhang Chun-Sung Ferng Da-Cheng Juan Ankur Taly Cyrus Rashtchian International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Augmenting LLMs with context leads to improved performance across many applications. Despite much research on Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) systems, an open question is whether errors arise because LLMs fail to utilize the context from retrieval or the context itself is insufficient to answer the query. To shed light on this, we develop a new notion of sufficient context, along with a method to classify instances that have enough information to answer the query. We then use sufficient context to analyze several models and datasets. By stratifying errors based on context sufficiency, we find that larger models with higher baseline performance (Gemini 1.5 Pro, GPT 4o, Claude 3.5) excel at answering queries when the context is sufficient, but often output incorrect answers instead of abstaining when the context is not. On the other hand, smaller models with lower baseline performance (Llama 3.1, Mistral 3, Gemma 2) hallucinate or abstain often, even with sufficient context. We further categorize cases when the context is useful, and improves accuracy, even though it does not fully answer the query and the model errs without the context. Building on our findings, we explore ways to reduce hallucinations in RAG systems, including a new selective generation method that leverages sufficient context information for guided abstention. Our method improves the fraction of correct answers among times where the model responds by 2--10% for Gemini, GPT, and Gemma. View details Passive Heart Rate Monitoring During Smartphone Use in Everyday Life Shun Liao Paolo Di Achille Jiang Wu Silviu Borac Jonathan Wang Xin Liu Eric Teasley Lawrence Cai Yun Liu Daniel McDuff Hao-Wei Su Brent Winslow Anupam Pathak Shwetak Patel Jim Taylor Jamie Rogers Ming-Zher Poh (2025) Preview Preview abstract Resting heart rate (RHR) is an important biomarker of cardiovascular health and mortality, but tracking it longitudinally generally requires a wearable device, limiting its availability. We present PHRM, a deep learning system for passive heart rate (HR) and RHR measurements during ordinary smartphone use, using facial video-based photoplethysmography. Our system was developed using 225,773 videos from 495 participants and validated on 185,970 videos from 205 participants in laboratory and free-living conditions – the largest validation study of its kind. Compared to reference electrocardiogram, PHRM achieved a mean absolute percentage error (MAPE) View details Keep Guessing? When Considering Inference Scaling, Mind the Baselines Gal Yona Or Honovich Omer Levy Roee Aharoni 2025 Preview Preview abstract Recent work suggested utilizing inference compute, showing that scaling of number of samples consistently improves the fractions of problems solved by any attempt, namely the coverage. In this work, we suggest that inference scaling gains should be compared with proper baselines, as some datasets become degenerate when allowing a large number of attempts. We focus on two domains - mathematical reasoning and factual knowledge, showing that for the MATH and Entity Questions datasets, informed answer enumeration obtains similar or even better results than repeated model sampling, with a much lower sample budget. While we believe that inference scaling is a promising approach for unlocking the potential of language models, we recommend carefully selecting models and datasets when applying this method. Otherwise, the results of inference scaling should be interpreted with caution. View details A Recipe for Improving Remote Sensing Zero Shot Generalization Aviad Barzilai Yotam Gigi Vered Silverman Yehonathan Refael Bolous Jaber Amr Helmy Tomer Shekel George Leifman Genady Beryozkin 3rd ML4RS Workshop at ICLR 2025 Preview Preview abstract Foundation models have had a significant impact across various AI applications, enabling applications for use cases that were previously impossible. Visual language models (VLMs), in particular, have outperformed other techniques in many tasks. In remote sensing (RS), foundation models have shown improvements across various applications. However, unlike other fields, the use of VLMs with large-scale remote sensing image-text datasets remains limited. In this work, we first introduce two novel image-caption datasets for training of remote sensing foundation models. The first dataset pairs aerial and satellite imagery, aligned with Google-Maps data, with high-quality captions generated using Gemini. The second utilizes public web images and their corresponding alt-text, filtered for only remote sensing domain, resulting in a highly diverse dataset. We show that using these datasets to pre-train the Mammut [], a VLM architecture, results in state-of-the-art generalization performance in a zero-shot classification and cross-modal retrieval on well-known public benchmarks. Secondly, we leverage this newly pre-trained VLM to generate inference attention maps for a novel class query (i.e., a class unseen during training). We subsequently propose an iterative self-supervised fine-tuning approach where samples aligned with these attention maps are iteratively pseudo-labeled and utilized for model training. View details 4 5 6 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
