 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 646 - 660 of 676 publications chip template Remove CubeDiff: Repurposing Diffusion-Based Image Models for Panorama Generation Nikolai Kalischek Michael Oechsle Fabian Manhardt Philipp Henzler Konrad Schindler Federico Tombari 2025 Preview Preview abstract We introduce a novel method for generating 360° panoramas from text prompts or images. Our approach leverages recent advances in 3D generation by employ- ing multi-view diffusion models to jointly synthesize the six faces of a cubemap. Unlike previous methods that rely on processing equirectangular projections or autoregressive generation, our method treats each face as a standard perspec- tive image, simplifying the generation process and enabling the use of existing multi-view diffusion models. We demonstrate that these models can be adapted to produce high-quality cubemaps without requiring correspondence-aware attention layers. Our model allows for fine-grained text control, generates high resolution panorama images and generalizes well beyond its training set, whilst achieving state-of-the-art results, both qualitatively and quantitatively. View details Experiencing EmbedNet: Embedding self-sensing to 3D casting objects Artem Dementyev Irmandy Wicaksono Joseph Paradiso Fangzheng Liu 2025 Preview Preview abstract This paper introduces EmbedNet, a method for integrating dense sensor networks into casting objects. With EmbedNet, sensor nodes are seamlessly incorporated into casting objects during fabrication. The process involves extruding base materials like silicone rubber or liquid plastic and a custom-designed sensor strip using a hand-held extruder into a mold tailored to specific applications. The base material mixes with the sensor strip in the mold, and upon curing, the result is an object with a defined shape housing a sensor network. EmbedNet employs a small Host node to access sensor data from all nodes on the strip. Each sensor node is self-contained and provides status indications through an onboard RGB LED. The Host connects with all sensor nodes using just three wires: power, ground, and data. This one-wire communication is facilitated through a custom-designed software serial port for each sensor node. The paper showcases various applications of EmbedNet, including wearables, home sensing, and entertainment devices. View details Reality Proxy: Fluid Interactions with Real-World Objects in MR via Abstract Representations Xiaoan Liu Difan Jia Xianhao Carton Liu Mar Gonzalez Franco Zhu-tian Chen ACM UIST (2025) Preview Preview abstract Interacting with real-world objects in Mixed Reality (MR) often proves difficult when they are crowded, distant, or partially occluded, hindering straightforward selection and manipulation. We observe that these difficulties stem from performing interaction directly on physical objects, where input is tightly coupled to their physical constraints. Our key insight is to decouple interaction from these constraints by introducing proxies–abstract representations of real-world objects. We embody this concept in Reality Proxy, a system that seamlessly shifts interaction targets from physical objects to their proxies during selection. Beyond facilitating basic selection, Reality Proxy uses AI to enrich proxies with semantic attributes and hierarchical spatial relationships of their corresponding physical objects, enabling novel and previously cumbersome interactions in MR -such as skimming, attribute-based filtering, navigating nested groups, and complex multi-object selections— all without requiring new gestures or menu systems. We demonstrate Reality Proxy’s versatility across diverse scenarios, including office information retrieval, large-scale spatial navigation, and multi-drone control. An expert evaluation suggests the system’s utility and usability, suggesting that proxy-based abstractions offer a powerful and generalizable interaction paradigm for future MR systems. View details Beneath the surface of consistency: Exploring cross-lingual knowledge representation sharing in llms Maxim Ifergan Leshem Choshen Roee Aharoni Idan Szpektor Omri Abend 2025 Preview Preview abstract The veracity of a factoid is largely independent of the language it is written in. However, language models are inconsistent in their ability to answer the same factual question across languages. This raises questions about how they represent a given fact across languages. We explore multilingual factual knowledge through two parallel aspects: the model's ability to answer a query consistently across languages ({\it consistency}), and to represent these answers for several languages ({\it shared representation}). We propose a methodology to measure the extent to which LLMs share factual knowledge across languages, repurposing knowledge editing methods to assess cross-lingual generalization. We examine LLMs of different types, including monolingual, bilingual, multilingual, and language-extended models. Our analysis on a new multilingual dataset reveals that high consistency does not necessarily imply shared representation, particularly for languages with different scripts. We find that script similarity is a dominant factor in knowledge sharing, even in monolingual models. We observe that if LLMs could fully share knowledge across languages, their accuracy in their best-performing language could benefit an increase of up to 150\% on average. These findings highlight the need for improved multilingual knowledge representation in LLMs and suggest a path for the development of more robust and consistent multilingual LLMs. View details EmBARDiment: an Embodied AI Agent for Productivity in XR Riccardo Bovo Eric Gonzalez Steven Abreu Karan Ahuja Li-Te Cheng Mar Gonzalez Franco IEEE VR (2025) Preview Preview abstract XR devices running chatbots powered by Large Language Models (LLMs) have the potential to become always-on agents that significantly enhance productivity scenarios. Current screen-based chatbots fail to fully utilize the comprehensive suite of natural inputs available in XR, including inward-facing sensor data. Instead, they over-rely on explicit voice or text prompts, sometimes paired with multi-modal data included in the query. We propose a solution that leverages an attention framework to implicitly derive context from user actions, eye gaze, and contextual memory within the XR environment. Our approach minimizes the need for explicitly engineered prompts, fostering intuitive and grounded interactions that provide deeper user insights for the chatbot. View details Text Entry for XR Trove (TEXT): Collecting and Analyzing Techniques for Text Input in XR Arpit Bhatia Moaaz Hudhud Mughrabi Massimiliano Di Luca Mar Gonzalez Franco Diar Abdlkarim Karan Ahuja Hasti Seifi ACM CHI (2025) Preview Preview abstract Text entry for extended reality (XR) is far from perfect, and a variety of text entry techniques (TETs) have been proposed to fit various contexts of use. However, comparing between TETs remains challenging due to the lack of a consolidated collection of techniques, and limited understanding of how interaction attributes of a technique (e.g., presence of visual feedback) impact user performance. To address these gaps, this paper examines the current landscape of XR TETs by creating a database of 176 different techniques. We analyze this database to highlight trends in the design of these techniques, the metrics used to evaluate them, and how various interaction attributes impact these metrics. We discuss implications for future techniques and present TEXT: Text Entry for XR Trove, an interactive online tool to navigate our database. View details Language Models Know More Than They Show: Exploring Hallucinations From the Model’s Viewpoint Hasas Orgad Michael Toker Zorik Gekhman Roi Reichart Idan Szpektor Hadas Kotek Yonatan Belinkov 2025 Preview Preview abstract We introduce a model-centric approach to investigate hallucinations and other errors generated by large language models (LLMs). We begin by developing an enhanced error detection method, using a linear classifier that leverages intermediate representations of exact answer tokens and outperform existing techniques. Our findings confirm that LLMs encode information on the truthfulness of their outputs, yet they also challenge the existence of universal truthfulness features by showing that generalization is skill-specific. Next, we propose a new error categorization by analyzing the distribution their responses, which uncovers distinct patterns in error types. We discover that these types are also predictable from internal model states, revealing that internal representations encode more than truthfulness. Finally, we find that a trained probe can effectively identify correct answers from multiple generated samples, outperforming other baselines for returning an answer. This exposes a critical \textit{disconnect} between the external behavior of LLMs and their internal state. Our results suggest new directions for understanding and mitigating errors in LLMs. View details The neuroscience of algorithmic suffering Esen K Tutuncu Mar Gonzalez Franco Frontiers in Psychology (2025) Preview Preview abstract The question of whether AI possesses human-like experience is perhaps misleading, as it’s too abstract to tackle as a whole. Indeed humans exhibit many layers of complex feelings and emotions, so it is probably better to explore, one by one, different human traits. For example, recent studies have shown some AI chatbots can apparently show more empathy towards coworkers than their own peers. And yes, we know some people lack empathy; perhaps that isn’t the news. However, one common trait of humans everywhere is their capacity to suffer. That is the aspect on which we will focus on this paper: how is human suffering different or similar to AI? Suffering has captured the attention of AI research in the past. Here we go one step further, giving it a neuroscientific revision along with the groundings in Bayesian inference, behavioral psychology, and theories of consciousness. View details ForcePinch: Force-Responsive Spatial Interaction for Tracking Speed Control and Beyond Chenyang Zhang Tiffany S Ma John Andrews Eric Gonzalez Mar Gonzalez Franco Yalong Yang ACM UIST (2025) Preview Preview abstract Spatial interaction in 3D environments requires balancing efficiency and precision, which requires dynamic tracking speed adjustments. However, existing techniques often couple tracking speed adjustments directly with hand movements, reducing interaction flexibility. Inspired by the natural friction control inherent in the physical world, we introduce ForcePinch, a novel force-responsive spatial interaction method that enables users to intuitively modulate pointer tracking speed and smoothly transition between rapid and precise movements by varying their pinching force. To implement this concept, we developed a hardware prototype integrating a pressure sensor with a customizable mapping function that translates pinching force into tracking speed adjustments. We conducted a user study with 20 participants performing well established 1D, 2D, and 3D object manipulation tasks, comparing ForcePinch against distance-responsive technique Go-Go and speed-responsive technique PRISM. Results highlight distinctive characteristics of the force-responsive approach across different interaction contexts. Drawing insights from these findings, we further propose a generative framework designed to systematically extend force-responsive interactions to diverse spatial interaction scenarios. To illustrate the versatility and practical applicability of this framework, we designed and implemented eight representative applications, offering guidelines and inspiration for future force-enabled interaction designs. View details HandOver: Enabling Precise Selection & Manipulation of 3DObjects with Mouse and Hand Tracking Esen K Tutuncu Mar Gonzalez Franco Eric Gonzalez ACM UIST (2025) Preview Preview abstract We present HandOver, a new interaction technique designed to unify precise mouse‐based selection with intuitive hand‐tracking for virtual object manipulation. Our system’s depth‐aware 3D cursor allows users to join the accuracy of mouse input for near‐field tasks, then seamlessly switch to a “hand clone” when the physical hand lifts off the mouse area. This transition mechanism extends direct grasping and ray‐casting capabilities to distant objects, mitigating the fatigue and jitter often associated with purely gestural input. In a formal user study, we compare HandOver against two ray‐based techniques: Ray+Hand and Ray—across near, mid, and far distances. Quantitative results indicate that HandOver maintains minimal error and faster targeting times at far‐field ranges while offering fluid transitions into more distant interactions. Subjective feedback and ergonomic measures (e.g., RULA posture, NASA‐TLX workload) further reinforce that blending mouse precision with hands‐on expressiveness can improve user comfort, accuracy, and speed in immersive 3D environments. Bridging these paradigms yields a single, continuous workflow that adapts to different spatial contexts, reaffirming the role of “the hand” in modern virtual object manipulation. View details Synthesizing 3D Abstractions by Inverting Procedural Buildings with Transformers Max Dax Jordi Serrano Berbel Jan Stria Leonidas Guibas Urs Bergmann 2025 Preview Preview abstract We generate abstractions of buildings, reflecting the essential aspects of their geometry and structure, by learning to invert procedural models. We first build a dataset of abstract procedural building models paired with simulated point clouds and then learn the inverse mapping through a transformer. Given a point cloud, the trained transformer then infers the corresponding abstracted building in terms of a programmatic language description. This approach leverages expressive procedural models developed for gaming and animation, and thereby retains desirable properties such as efficient rendering of the inferred abstractions and strong priors for regularity and symmetry. Our approach achieves good reconstruction accuracy in terms of geometry and structure, as well as structurally consistent inpainting. View details Fingertip Impedance Plethysmography: A New Window Into Peripheral Blood Flow Seamus Thomson Seobin Jung 2025 Preview Preview abstract This paper presents the first reported measurements of impedance plethysmography (IPG) signals from the human fingertip. The human fingertip serves as a vital non-invasive access point for cardiovascular monitoring, with photoplethysmography (PPG) widely adopted for its assessment of superficial blood flow. However, the optical sensing depth of PPG limits its capacity to fully characterize deeper peripheral hemodynamics. Here, we developed a novel four-electrode fingertip IPG prototype and measurement protocol, enabling the consistent capture of pulsatile impedance waveforms reflecting blood volume changes within the digit. Preliminary data from two participants illustrates clear signal reproducibility, enabling the derivation of key pulse wave metrics including pulse arrival time (PAT). Given IPG’s electrical sensing principle, distinct from PPG’s optical approach, our findings suggest that fingertip IPG offers a complementary “new window” into peripheral circulation. This work establishes fingertip IPG as a significant advancement for non-invasive physiological monitoring, holding promise for both clinical applications and wearable health technologies. View details Smartphone use in a large US adult population: Temporal associations between objective measures of usage and mental well-being John Hernandez Ari Winbush Benjamin Nelson Nicholas Allen Andrew Barakat Daniel McDuff Conor Heneghan Allen Jiang PNAS (2025) Preview Preview abstract Smartphones are a vital tool for most people. They facilitate many everyday tasks and as a result they have become ubiquitous and indispensable. There are concerns about how the use of these devices may impact mental health and wellbeing. Yet, there are few studies that have reported objective data about phone usage from large and diverse cohorts and studies have found low correlations between subjective and objective smartphone use. In order to better elucidate these complex interactions, it is important to understand and characterize what resembles “normative” smartphone use behavior. In this paper, we present normative patterns of objectively measured phone usage from a large prospective observational study. We analyze a quarter of a million days of phone usage data from 10,099 adult subjects that provides objective longitudinal data over a four week period in the US general population. Contrary to popular belief, our model shows little support for the conclusion that smartphone use predicts mood the following week or that mood predicts smartphone use the following week, with some results differing depending on whether the effects are within-person or between-person. Lastly, while some findings are statistically significant, the effect sizes of these results are minimal, suggesting little to no impact in real-world settings and therefore a lack of clinical significance. View details Inference-Aware Fine-Tuning for Best-of-N Sampling in Large Language Models Yinlam Chow Guy Tennenholtz Izzeddin Gur Vincent Zhuang Bo Dai Aviral Kumar Rishabh Agarwal Sridhar Thiagarajan Craig Boutilier Aleksandra Faust Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR-25), Singapore (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent studies have indicated that effectively utilizing inference-time compute is crucial for attaining better performance from large language models (LLMs). In this work, we propose a novel inference-aware fine-tuning paradigm, in which the model is fine-tuned in a manner that directly optimizes the performance of the inference-time strategy. We study this paradigm using the simple yet effective Best-of-N (BoN) inference strategy, in which a verifier selects the best out of a set of LLM-generated responses. We devise the first imitation learning and reinforcement learning (RL) methods for BoN-aware fine-tuning, overcoming the challenging, non-differentiable argmax operator within BoN. We empirically demonstrate that our BoN-aware models implicitly learn a meta-strategy that interleaves best responses with more diverse responses that might be better suited to a test-time input—a process reminiscent of the exploration-exploitation trade-off in RL. Our experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of BoN-aware fine-tuning in terms of improved performance and inference-time compute. In particular, we show that our methods improve the Bo32 performance of Gemma 2B on Hendrycks MATH from 26.8% to 30.8%, and pass@32 from 60.0% to 67.0%, as well as the pass@16 on HumanEval from 61.6% to 67.1%. View details FLARE: Fine-tuned Long-context Acceleration with ReLU-enhanced FIRE Michael Moffatt Junyi Luo Haoran Cheng Qilong Wang Xinting Jiang Guanchen Tao Shiwei Liu Kauna Lei Gregory Kielian Mehdi Saligane 2025 Preview Preview abstract Deploying large language models (LLMs) on resource-constrained edge devices, such as mobile phones or IoT devices, is highly desirable for enabling secure, personalized on-device AI. However, there are significant challenges due to these models' high computational and memory demands. A key bottleneck lies in the Transformer's attention block, especially when handling long contexts. Techniques like model architectures with Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activations for Softmax and FIRE positional encoding (a resource-efficient, automatic context-length-scaling alternative to Rotary Positional Embedding (RoPE)) have each independently shown promise in reducing the computational complexity of the attention block, but the proper alchemy for combining their benefits remains underexplored. In this paper, we show a method for combining FIRE and ReLU that maintains low-validation loss at long contexts. We also introduce FLARE, a new algorithm that further improves efficiency by removing operations from the learned relative position encoding in FIRE. Our approach leads to faster inference on long sequences, robust generalization to varying context lengths, and lower validation loss compared to baseline models. FLARE achieves a significant reduction in power and area consumption. On custom hardware, it achieves a $6\times$ higher operating frequency than Softmax, while occupying $57\times$ less silicon area (measured under different throughput settings) and consuming $600\times$ less energy. Our results indicate that FLARE represents a significant step towards deploying powerful LLMs efficiently on resource-limited devices. View details 44 45 of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
