 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 211 - 225 of 676 publications chip template Remove Speculative Knowledge Distillation: Bridging the Teacher-Student Gap Through Interleaved Sampling Rujun Han Tomas Pfister Chen-Yu Lee Lei Li Wenda Xu Long Le Rishabh Agarwal William Wang Dhruv Madeka Zifeng Wang ICLR 2025 Preview Preview abstract Recent knowledge distillation (KD) research made significant progress on improving smaller student models to match larger teachers' performances. Two noticeable methods, supervised KD and on-policy KD emerged as the state-of-the-art approaches. However, supervised KD for auto-regressive models suffers from distribution mismatch between training over fixed dataset and inference over student generated outputs. Conversely, on-policy KD, which uses student-generated samples for training, can suffer from low-quality training examples and the teacher's potential inaccuracies in assessing these samples. To address these limitations, we introduce Speculative Knowledge Distillation (SKD). Instead of solely training on teacher- or student-proposed samples, SKD leverages the student model to initially propose tokens following its own generation distribution. Subsequently, the teacher model is employed to replace tokens that are deemed out-of-distribution. Compared with supervised KD, the samples generated by SKD are more likely to align with the student's inference-time distribution, and 2) SKD can mitigate the generation of low-quality sequences by incorporating the teacher's feedback at each token. Furthermore, we demonstrate that SKD is a generic framework capable of implementing both supervised and on-policy knowledge distillation as specific instances. To validate SKD's effectiveness, we apply it to distill autoregressive large language models for various tasks, including translation, summarization, math, and instruction following. Our experiments consistently demonstrate SKD's superior performance compared to existing methods across different domains, tasks, data sizes, and model initialization strategies. View details MLE-STAR: Machine Learning Engineering Agent via Search and Targeted Refinement Sercan Arik Jinwoo Shin Tomas Pfister Jiefeng Chen Jaehyun Nam Jinsung Yoon 2025 Preview Preview abstract Agents based on large language models (LLMs) for machine learning engineering (MLE) can automatically implement ML models via code generation. However, existing approaches to build such agents often rely heavily on inherent LLM knowledge and employ coarse exploration strategies that modify the entire code structure at once. This limits their ability to select effective task-specific models and perform deep exploration within specific components, such as experimenting extensively with feature engineering options. To overcome these, we propose MLE-STAR, a novel approach to build MLE agents. MLESTAR first leverages external knowledge by using a search engine to retrieve effective models from the web, forming an initial solution, then iteratively refines it by exploring various strategies targeting specific ML components. This exploration is guided by ablation studies analyzing the impact of individual code blocks. Furthermore, we introduce a novel ensembling method using an effective strategy suggested by MLE-STAR. Our experimental results show that MLE-STAR achieves medals in 64% of the Kaggle competitions on the MLE-bench Lite, significantly outperforming the best alternative. View details Speculative RAG: Enhancing Retrieval Augmented Generation through Drafting Zilong Wang Zifeng Wang Long Le Steven Zheng Swaroop Mishra Vincent Perot Yuwei Zhang Anush Mattapalli Ankur Taly Jingbo Shang Chen-Yu Lee Tomas Pfister ICLR 2025 Preview Preview abstract Retrieval augmented generation (RAG) has attracted a lot of attention across both academia and industry due to its capability in inserting timely and accurate evidence to the generation by large language models. However, the introduction of retrieved evidence largely makes the input prompt longer, which would harm the understanding quality of large language models and make it slower in actual usage scenarios. To solve these issues, we propose SpeculativeRAG, which leverages a smaller LLM to conduct the retrieval augmented generation for a larger LLM. The smaller LLM can digest a few pieces of evidence and generate multiple pieces of drafts in parallel rapidly, and these drafts will be verified by a large LLM to guarantee the quality. We achieve a higher speed as well as a better quality in the RAG results. View details Speculative Knowledge Distillation: Bridging the Teacher-Student Gap Through Interleaved Sampling Wenda Xu Rujun Han Zifeng Wang Long Le Dhruv Madeka Lei Li William Wang Rishabh Agarwal Chen-Yu Lee Tomas Pfister 2025 Preview Preview abstract Recent advances in knowledge distillation (KD) have enabled smaller student models to approach the performance of larger teacher models. However, popular methods such as supervised KD and on-policy KD, are adversely impacted by the knowledge gaps between teacher-student in practical scenarios. Supervised KD suffers from a distribution mismatch between training with a static dataset and inference over final student-generated outputs. Conversely, on-policy KD, which uses student-generated samples for training, can suffer from low-quality training examples with which teacher models are not familiar, resulting in inaccurate teacher feedback. To address these limitations, we introduce Speculative Knowledge Distillation (SKD), a novel approach that leverages cooperation between student and teacher models to generate high-quality training data on-the-fly while aligning with the student’s inference-time distribution. In SKD, the student proposes tokens, and the teacher replaces poorly ranked ones based on its own distribution, transferring high-quality knowledge adaptively. We evaluate SKD on various text generation tasks, including translation, summarization, math, and instruction following, and show that SKD consistently outperforms existing KD methods across different domains, data sizes, and model initialization strategies View details Deep Researcher with Test-time Diffusion Rujun Han Yanfei Chen Guan Sun Lesly Miculicich Zoey CuiZhu Yuanjun (Sophia) Bi Weiming Wen Hui Wan Chunfeng Wen Solène Maître George Lee Vishy Tirumalashetty Emily Xue Zizhao Zhang Salem Haykal Burak Gokturk Tomas Pfister Chen-Yu Lee 2025 Preview Preview abstract Deep research agents, powered by Large Language Models (LLMs), are rapidly advancing; yet, their performance often plateaus when generating complex, long-form research reports using generic test-time scaling algorithms. Drawing inspiration from the iterative nature of human research, which involves cycles of searching, reasoning, and revision, we propose the Test-Time Diffusion Deep Researcher (TTD-DR). This novel framework conceptualizes research report generation as a diffusion process. TTD-DR initiates this process with a preliminary draft, an updatable skeleton that serves as an evolving foundation to guide the research direction. The draft is then iteratively refined through a "denoising" process, which is dynamically informed by a retrieval mechanism that incorporates external information at each step. The core process is further enhanced by a self-evolutionary algorithm applied to each component of the agentic workflow, ensuring the generation of high-quality context for the diffusion process. This draft-centric design guides the report writing process to be more timely and coherent while reducing information loss during the iterative search process. We demonstrate that our TTD-DR achieves state-of-the-art results on a wide array of benchmarks that require intensive search and multi-hop reasoning, significantly outperforming existing deep research agents. View details GenAI-Powered PLM: Navigating Complexity and Driving Agility Nanda Balasubramanian Venkat Sharma Gaddala IRE Journals, 9 (2025), pp. 262-274 Preview Preview abstract The accelerating pace of innovation is fundamentally reshaping product development, creating a complex environment that demands rapid decision-making and efficient information management. To remain competitive, organizations must integrate Generative AI (GenAI) tools into their Product Lifecycle Management (PLM) processes. This integration is crucial because traditional PLM systems, often built on decades-old architectures, struggle to manage modern product complexity, vast data volumes, and interconnected supply chains.1 Limitations such as data silos, inflexible change management, and inadequate collaboration capabilities hinder the agility required today.3 GenAI offers transformative potential by automating complex tasks, enhancing data analysis, and facilitating more dynamic design and collaboration within the PLM ecosystem.5 This integration is not merely an upgrade but an essential evolution to overcome the inherent architectural and process constraints of legacy systems, which impede the speed and data fluidity necessary in the current market. View details Emerging AI Trends for Sustainable Data Centers Venkat Sharma Gaddala Vandana Kollati International Journal of Management, IT & Engineering (2025) Preview Preview abstract As the demand for data and digital services continues to escalate, data centers are evolving into key players in the global energy consumption landscape. The necessity for sustainability and energy efficiency in these facilities has led to the integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) technologies. This paper explores emerging AI trends that are shaping sustainable data centers, focusing on optimization, predictive analytics, and machine learning applications, along with their implications for operational efficiency and environmental impact. The rapid growth of artificial intelligence (AI) has significantly impacted data center operations, driving the need for sustainable practices. Emerging trends such as AI-driven energy optimization, renewable energy integration, and advanced cooling technologies are reshaping the industry. These innovations aim to reduce energy consumption, minimize carbon footprints, and enhance operational efficiency. By leveraging AI, data centers can predict maintenance needs, optimize energy usage, and adapt to real-time demands. This paper explores the intersection of AI and sustainability, highlighting how these advancements contribute to a more eco-friendly and efficient future for data centers. View details Collaborative Diffusion Model for Recommender System Gyuseok Lee Yaochen Zhu Hwanjo Yu Yao Zhou Jundong Li 2025 Preview Preview abstract Diffusion-based recommender systems (DR) have gained increasing attention for their advanced generative and denoising capabilities. However, existing DR face two central limitations: (i) a trade-off between enhancing generative capacity via noise injection and retaining the loss of personalized information. (ii) the underutilization of rich item-side information. To address these challenges, we present a Collaborative Diffusion model for Recommender System (CDiff4Rec). Specifically, CDiff4Rec generates pseudo-users from item features and leverages collaborative signals from both real and pseudo personalized neighbors identified through behavioral similarity, thereby effectively reconstructing nuanced user preferences. Experimental results on three public datasets show that CDiff4Rec outperforms competitors by effectively mitigating the loss of personalized information through the integration of item content and collaborative signals. View details Bridging Fairness and Uncertainty: Theoretical Insights and Practical Strategies for Equalized Coverage in GNNs Longfeng Wu Yao Zhou Jian Kang Dawei Zhou 2025 Preview Preview abstract Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have become indispensable tools in many domains, such as social network analysis, financial fraud detection, and drug discovery. Prior research primarily concentrated on improving prediction accuracy while overlooking how reliable the model predictions are. Conformal prediction on graphs emerges as a promising solution, offering statistically sound uncertainty estimates with a pre-defined coverage level. Despite the promising progress, existing works only focus on achieving model coverage guarantees without considering fairness in the coverage within different demographic groups. To bridge the gap between conformal prediction and fair coverage across different groups, we pose the fundamental question: Can fair GNNs enable the uncertainty estimates to be fairly applied across demographic groups? To answer this question, we provide a comprehensive analysis of the uncertainty estimation in fair GNNs employing various strategies. We prove theoretically that fair GNNs can enforce consistent uncertainty bounds across different demographic groups, thereby minimizing bias in uncertainty estimates. Furthermore, we conduct extensive experiments on five commonly used datasets across seven state-of-the-art fair GNN models to validate our theoretical findings. Additionally, based on the theoretical and empirical insights, we identify and analyze the key strategies from various fair GNN models that contribute to ensuring equalized uncertainty estimates. Our work estimates a solid foundation for future exploration of the practical implications and potential adjustments needed to enhance fairness in GNN applications across various domains. View details DORA 2025 State of AI-assisted Software Development Report Derek DeBellis Kevin Storer Nathen Harvey Matt Beane Rob Edwards Edward Fraser Ben Good Eirini Kalliamvakou Gene Kim Eric Maxwell Sarah D'Angelo Sarah Inman Ambar Murillo Daniella Villalba DORA, Google (2025) Preview Preview abstract In 2025, the central question for technology leaders is no longer if they should adopt AI, but how to realize its value. DORA’s research includes more than 100 hours of qualitative data and survey responses from nearly 5,000 technology professionals from around the world. The research reveals a critical truth: AI’s primary role in software development is that of an amplifier. It magnifies the strengths of high-performing organizations and the dysfunctions of struggling ones. View details Introducing the DORA AI Capabilities Model: 7 keys to succeeding in AI-assisted software development Kevin Storer Derek DeBellis Google Cloud, Google (2025) Preview Preview abstract Artificial intelligence is rapidly transforming software development. But simply adopting AI tools isn’t a guarantee of success. Across the industry, tech leaders and developers are asking the same critical questions: How do we move from just using AI to truly succeeding with it? How do we ensure our investment in AI delivers better, faster, and more reliable software? The DORA research team has developed the inaugural DORA AI Capabilities Model to provide data-backed guidance for organizations grappling with these questions. This is not just another report on AI adoption trends; it is a guide to the specific technical and cultural practices that amplify the benefits of AI. View details RFC 9774 - Deprecation of AS_SET and AS_CONFED_SET in BGP Warren Kumari RFC Editor, RFC Editor (2025), pp. 13 Preview Preview abstract BCP 172 (i.e., RFC 6472) recommends not using AS_SET and AS_CONFED_SET AS_PATH segment types in the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP). This document advances that recommendation to a standards requirement in BGP; it prohibits the use of the AS_SET and AS_CONFED_SET path segment types in the AS_PATH. This is done to simplify the design and implementation of BGP and to make the semantics of the originator of a BGP route clearer. This will also simplify the design, implementation, and deployment of various BGP security mechanisms. This document updates RFC 4271 by deprecating the origination of BGP routes with AS_SET (Type 1 AS_PATH segment) and updates RFC 5065 by deprecating the origination of BGP routes with AS_CONFED_SET (Type 4 AS_PATH segment). Finally, it obsoletes RFC 6472. View details Probing non-equilibrium topological order on a quantum processor Melissa Will Tyler Cochran Eliott Rosenberg Bernhard Jobst Norhan Eassa Pedram Roushan Michael Knap Adam Gammon-Smith Frank Pollmann Nature, 645 (2025), 348–353 Preview Preview abstract Out-of-equilibrium phases in many-body systems constitute a new paradigm in quantum matter—they exhibit dynamical properties that may otherwise be forbidden by equilibrium thermodynamics. Among these non-equilibrium phases are periodically driven (Floquet) systems, which are generically difficult to simulate classically because of their high entanglement. Here we realize a Floquet topologically ordered state on an array of superconducting qubits. We image the characteristic dynamics of its chiral edge modes and characterize its emergent anyonic excitations. Devising an interferometric algorithm allows us to introduce and measure a bulk topological invariant to probe the dynamical transmutation of anyons for system sizes up to 58 qubits. Our work demonstrates that quantum processors can provide key insights into the thus-far largely unexplored landscape of highly entangled non-equilibrium phases of matter. View details XR Blocks: Accelerating Human-Centered AI + XR Innovation David Li Nels Numan Xun Qian Yanhe Chen Zhongyi Zhou Evgenii Alekseev Geonsun Lee Alex Cooper Min Xia Scott Chung Jeremy Nelson Xiuxiu Yuan Jolica Dias Tim Bettridge Benjamin Hersh Michelle Huynh Konrad Piascik Ricardo Cabello David Kim Ruofei Du Google, XR, XR Labs (2025) Preview Preview abstract We are on the cusp where Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Extended Reality (XR) are converging to unlock new paradigms of interactive computing. However, a significant gap exists between the ecosystems of these two fields: while AI research and development is accelerated by mature frameworks like PyTorch and benchmarks like LMArena, prototyping novel AI-driven XR interactions remains a high-friction process, often requiring practitioners to manually integrate disparate, low-level systems for perception, rendering, and interaction. To bridge this gap, we present XR Blocks, a cross-platform framework designed to accelerate human-centered AI + XR innovation. XR Blocks provides a modular architecture with plug-and-play components for core abstraction in AI + XR: user, world, peers; interface, context, and agents. Crucially, it is designed with the mission of "minimum code from idea to reality", accelerating rapid prototyping of complex AI + XR apps. Built upon accessible technologies (WebXR, three.js, TensorFlow, Gemini), our toolkit lowers the barrier to entry for XR creators. We demonstrate its utility through a set of open-source templates, samples, and advanced demos, empowering the community to quickly move from concept to interactive prototype. View details Our Approach to Protecting AI Training Data Yurii Sushko Cindy Muya Jason Novak Cindee Madison Reiner Critides Ben Kamber Niha Vempati Jeremy Wiesner David Deutscher Google, Google, Google, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA, 94043 (2025) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Google has over 25 years experience protecting data from inappropriate access and unauthorized use. In the era of AI, Google has extended these best practices in data protection to ensure that the right data is used the right way to train models. This paper presents a number of these best practices, describes how Google applies them in its systems, and describes how Google Cloud customers can use Google Cloud capabilities to implement these practices themselves. Protecting data requires both technical controls to enable safe data use at scale, and governance processes to ensure that companies have visibility and control over how their data is used. This fundamentally requires: understanding data and ensuring it has sufficient metadata in the form of attributes, controlling the data and implementing policies to allow (or disallow) certain usage based on those attributes, transforming data to enable its usage in policy compliant ways, and human oversight and governance. Protecting data in AI inherits these requirements and introduces new requirements to account for unique AI-specific risks including memorization/recitation and the costs of training foundational models. Meeting these new risks requires new capabilities including enhanced understanding of data and model lineage as well as an increased ability to control data usage through checks on data for policy compliance at the time a training job is configured before it is run. This white paper offers an in-depth look at data protection best practices and Google’s data protection capabilities, and is one of a series of publications about Google's Secure AI Framework (SAIF). Building upon its secure development practices, Google has developed and deployed a number of capabilities to understand, control, and transform data in its infrastructure so that data is both protected and used appropriately. This involves robust annotation systems to represent metadata and enable granular understanding of data at both an item and dataset level, policy engines that evaluate machine readable policies on that data using the metadata attributes, and sensors to understand how data is flowing across Google’s systems and raise alerts when policy violations occur. Moreover, Google has developed de-identification and anonymization systems to transform data to make it policy compliant and safer to use for AI training. View details 15 16 17 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
