 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 631 - 645 of 676 publications chip template Remove Earth AI: Unlocking Geospatial Insights with Foundation Models and Cross-Modal Reasoning Aaron Bell Amit Aides Amr Helmy Arbaaz Muslim Aviad Barzilai Aviv Slobodkin Bolous Jaber David Schottlander George Leifman Joydeep Paul Mimi Sun Nadav Sherman Natalie Williams Per Bjornsson Roy Lee Ruth Alcantara Thomas Turnbull Tomer Shekel Vered Silverman Yotam Gigi Adam Boulanger Alex Ottenwess Ali Ahmadalipour Anna Carter Behzad Vahedi Charles Elliott David Andre Elad Aharoni Gia Jung Hassler Thurston Jacob Bien Jamie McPike Jess Sapick Juliet Rothenberg Kartik Hegde Kel Markert Kim Jablonski Luc Houriez Monica Bharel Ean Phing VanLee Reuven Sayag Shelley Cazares Shlomi Pasternak Stone Jiang Thomas Colthurst Yang Chen Yehonathan Refael Yochai Blau Yuval Carny Yael Maguire Avinatan Hassidim James Manyika Tim Thelin Genady Beryozkin Gautam Prasad Luke Barrington Yossi Matias Niv Efron Shravya Shetty asXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Geospatial data offers immense potential for understanding our planet. However, the sheer volume and diversity of this data along with its varied resolutions, timescales, and sparsity pose significant challenges for thorough analysis and interpretation. This paper introduces Earth AI, a family of geospatial AI models and agentic reasoning that enables significant advances in our ability to unlock novel and profound insights into our planet. This approach is built upon foundation models across three key domains—Planet-scale Imagery, Population, and Environment—and an intelligent Gemini-powered reasoning engine. We present rigorous benchmarks showcasing the power and novel capabilities of our foundation models and validate that when used together, they provide complementary value for geospatial inference and their synergies unlock superior predictive capabilities. To handle complex, multi-step queries, we developed a Gemini-powered agent that jointly reasons over our multiple foundation models along with large geospatial data sources and tools. On a new benchmark of real-world crisis scenarios, our agent demonstrates the ability to deliver critical and timely insights, effectively bridging the gap between raw geospatial data and actionable understanding. View details SAC128 - SSAC Comments on Draft Governance Document for the Recognition, Maintenance, and Derecognition of RIRs Warren Kumari Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), ICANN Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) Reports and Advisories (2025), pp. 5 Preview Preview abstract The SSAC supports the overarching goals of the RIR Governance Document to establish clear rules and criteria for the recognition of new RIRs, the ongoing operational obligations of existing RIRs, and the processes for derecognition. The SSAC recognizes this document as a significant advancement over the existing Internet Coordination Policy 2 (ICP-2) and we commend the ASO AC for undertaking this important work to ensure the long-term security and stability of the Internet Numbers Registry System. In this report, the SSAC provides both general and specific comments intended to further strengthen the RIR Governance Document and enhance its practical applicability and robustness. View details SAC131 - SSAC Comments on Functional Model for Root Server System Governance Warren Kumari Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), ICANN Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) Reports and Advisories (2025), pp. 6 Preview Preview abstract The SSAC wishes to explicitly acknowledge the crucial role the Root Server Operators (RSOs) have performed over the years. Their steadfast stewardship and operational excellence have been critical to the global stability of the DNS. This architecture features: ● Independence at many different levels and dimensions of technology and operations. ● Resilient coverage throughout the world. ● Protocol and technology (e.g., anycast) that have evolved with the needs of the community. ● An exemplary uptime record. The SSAC supports the proposed Functional Model as a structural foundation for coordination and decision-making to support future RSS governance. The proposed Functional Model needs further specificity on several important issues:: ● Clearly articulated governance principles that provide guardrails for decision-making and evolution of the governance structure. ● A structured, staged implementation roadmap that balances operational continuity with the need for incremental governance maturity. ● The emphasis on inclusivity, transparency, and performance accountability across all phases of the governance structure. ● The recognition of the importance of diverse stakeholder participation and liaison relationships to ensure broad technical and policy alignment. The SSAC also notes the identification of funding stability for RSOs and their operations as an essential consideration. The SSAC supports and encourages continued dialogue among the community to explore sustainable funding approaches that safeguard long-term operational stability, reduce dependency risks, and ensure the RSS remains secure, reliable, and resilient. View details SAC130 - SSAC Comments on Name Collision Guidelines in the Proposed Language for the Draft Next Round Applicant Guidebook Warren Kumari Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), ICANN Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) Reports and Advisories (2025), pp. 12 Preview Preview abstract In this document, the SSAC focuses on a specific name collision scenario: when a new gTLD applicant applies for a string already in use in an alternative, non-DNS naming system (e.g., blockchain-based naming systems). Several alternative naming systems increasingly utilize the syntax of DNS names.Without explicit guidelines and proactive management, these alternative naming systems may create collisions with new gTLDs delegated through the New gTLD Program: Next Round. The SSAC believes these collisions could cause the following problems: ● Security vulnerabilities stemming from misdirected traffic or unexpected system interactions. ● Operational instability for network operators and end-users. ● User confusion due to unpredictable resolution behavior. The SSAC submits this comment to amplify and clarify key principles from NCAP2 that address these (previously identified) risks, so that the final AGB fully reflects this guidance. View details SAC132 - The Domain Name System Runs on Free and Open Source Software (FOSS) Warren Kumari Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), ICANN Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) Reports and Advisories (2025), pp. 47 Preview Preview abstract The Domain Name System (DNS) is a globally distributed, hierarchical, and decentralized system whose information underpins nearly every online interaction. Its principal purpose is to map user-friendly domain names to the computer-friendly IP addresses required to locate resources on the network. Whether browsing the web, sending an email, or using a mobile application, every online connection relies on information that originates from and is structured by the DNS. This report’s core finding is that the DNS is built and sustained on Free and Open Source Software (FOSS). This is not a niche practice, but the dominant reality. FOSS is the norm for the most fundamental components of DNS infrastructure. For example, at least nine of the 12 independent organizations that operate the Internet’s root server system (RSS) exclusively use FOSS implementations, and nine of the 10 largest service providers for top-level domains (TLDs) use FOSS. This dominance stems from the inherent strengths of the FOSS development model, which combines economic efficiency and low-friction adoption with the transparency, collaborative security, and operational resilience essential for critical infrastructure. Although the FOSS development model is fundamentally different from that of proprietary software, FOSS is not inherently more or less secure. The security of any software project is determined by the quality of its development and maintenance processes, not the visibility of its source code. Unlike commercial software, FOSS is a collaborative, global effort built upon four essential freedoms: to use, study, share, and change. This ecosystem depends on a global network of maintainers and contributors who are often unpaid volunteers. While many are unpaid volunteers, the DNS space is unique in also relying on a handful of long-lived maintenance organizations. This creates a model based on community collaboration rather than the commercial contracts that define a traditional software supply chain, which introduces unique risks related to financial sustainability for the maintenance organizations and maintainer burnout for volunteers. These unique characteristics mean that regulatory frameworks designed for proprietary software may not be well-suited for FOSS and therefore could have severe unintended consequences to the stability of critical Internet infrastructure. To navigate these complexities and foster a secure digital ecosystem, the Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) provides the following guidelines for policymakers: • Acknowledge the Critical Role of FOSS: Policymakers should explicitly acknowledge in any relevant legislation or regulation that critical Internet infrastructure relies on FOSS, and that its use is a strength to be preserved. • Consult the FOSS Community: Developing legislation and regulations should be informed by consulting all parts of the FOSS ecosystem, from individual maintainers to non-profits and corporations. • Make Use of the Contemporary Cases in FOSS Regulation: Policymakers can reference recent case studies in the report of contemporary approaches that incorporate the unique characteristics of the FOSS development model. • Incentivize FOSS Sustainability: Encourage public and private sector contributions to critical FOSS projects as a form of investment in a shared public good. • Address Systemic Risks Collectively: Foster and fund collaborative, ecosystem-wide solutions to mitigate risks from shared dependencies instead of burdening individual maintainers. View details Quantum many-body physics calculations with large language models Haining Pan Nayantara Mudur William Taranto Maria Tikhanovskaya Subhashini Venugopalan Yasaman Bahri Michael Brenner Eun-Ah Kim Nature Communications Physics (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated abilities to perform complex tasks in multiple domains, including mathematical and scientific reasoning. We demonstrate that with carefully designed prompts, LLMs can accurately carry out key calculations in research papers in theoretical physics. We focus on a broadly-used approximation method in quantum physics: the Hartree-Fock method, requiring an analytic multi-step calculation deriving approximate Hamiltonian and corresponding self-consistency equations. To carry out the calculations using LLMs, we design multi-step prompt templates that break down the analytic calculation into standardized steps with placeholders for problem-specific information. We evaluate GPT-4’s performance in executing the calculation for 15 papers from the past decade, demonstrating that, with the correction of intermediate steps, it can correctly derive the final Hartree-Fock Hamiltonian in 13 cases. Aggregating across all research papers, we find an average score of 87.5 (out of 100) on the execution of individual calculation steps. We further use LLMs to mitigate the two primary bottlenecks in this evaluation process: (i) extracting information from papers to fill in templates and (ii) automatic scoring of the calculation steps, demonstrating good results in both cases. View details Measuring Productivity: All Models are Wrong But Some are Useful Collin Green Ciera Jaspan IEEE Software Magazine (2025) Preview Preview abstract Measuring productivity is equivalent to building a model. All models are wrong, but some are useful. Productivity models are often “worryingly selective” (wrong because of omissions). Worrying selectivity can be combated by taking a holistic approach that includes multiple measurements of multiple outcomes. Productivity models should include multiple outcomes, metrics, and methods. View details Kernel Density Steering: Inference-Time Scaling via Mode Seeking for Image Restoration Yuyang Hu Kangfu Mei Mojtaba Ardakani Ulugbek S. Kamilov Peyman Milanfar Mauricio Delbracio 39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) Preview Preview abstract Diffusion models show promise for image restoration, but existing methods often struggle with inconsistent fidelity and undesirable artifacts. To address this, we introduce Kernel Density Steering (KDS), a novel inference-time framework promoting robust, high-fidelity outputs through explicit local mode-seeking. KDS employs an N-particle ensemble of diffusion samples, computing patch-wise kernel density estimation gradients from their collective outputs. These gradients steer patches in each particle towards shared, higher-density regions identified within the ensemble. This collective local mode-seeking mechanism, acting as ”collective wisdom”, steers samples away from spurious modes prone to artifacts, arising from independent sampling or model imperfections, and towards more robust, high fidelity structures. This allows us to obtain better quality samples at the expense of higher compute by simultaneously sampling multiple particles. As a plug-and-play framework, KDS requires no retraining or external verifiers, seamlessly integrating with various diffusion samplers. Extensive numerical validations demonstrate KDS substantially improves both quantitative and qualitative performance on challenging real-world super-resolution and image inpainting tasks. View details MS-SSM: A Multi-Scale State Space Model for Efficient Sequence Modeling Mahdi Karami Ali Behrooz Peilin Zhong Razvan Pascanu Vahab Mirrokni 2025 Preview Preview abstract State-space models (SSMs) have recently attention as an efficient alternative to computationally expensive attention-based models for sequence modeling. They rely on linear recurrences to integrate information over time, enabling fast inference, parallelizable training, and control over recurrence stability. However, traditional SSMs often suffer from limited effective memory, requiring larger state sizes for improved recall. Moreover, existing SSMs struggle to capture multi-scale dependencies, which are essential for modeling complex structures in time series, images, and natural language. This paper introduces a multi-scale SSM framework that addresses these limitations by representing sequence dynamics across multiple resolution and processing each resolution with specialized state-space dynamics. By capturing both fine-grained, high-frequency patterns and coarse, global trends, MS-SSM enhances memory efficiency and long-range modeling. We further introduce an input-dependent scale-mixer, enabling dynamic information fusion across resolutions. The proposed approach significantly improves sequence modeling, particularly in long-range and hierarchical tasks, while maintaining computational efficiency. Extensive experiments on benchmarks, including Long Range Arena, hierarchical reasoning, time series classification, and image recognition, demonstrate that MS-SSM consistently outperforms prior SSM-based models, highlighting the benefits of multi-resolution processing in state-space architectures. View details Best of Both Worlds: Advantages of Hybrid Graph Sequence Models Ali Behrooz Ali Parviz Mahdi Karami Clayton Sanford Bryan Perozzi Vahab Mirrokni 2025 Preview Preview abstract Modern sequence models (e.g., Transformers, linear RNNs, etc.) emerged as dominant backbones of recent deep learning frameworks, mainly due to their efficiency, representational power, and/or ability to capture long-range dependencies. Adopting these sequence models for graph-structured data has recently gained popularity as the alternative to Message Passing Neural Networks (MPNNs). There is, however, a lack of a common foundation about what constitutes a good graph sequence model, and a mathematical description of the benefits and deficiencies in adopting different sequence models for learning on graphs. To this end, we first present Graph Sequence Model (GSM), a unifying framework for adopting sequence models for graphs, consisting of three main steps: (1) Tokenization, which translates the graph into a set of sequences; (2) Local Encoding, which encodes local neighborhoods around each node; and (3) Global Encoding, which employs a scalable sequence model to capture long-range dependencies within the sequences. This framework allows us to understand, evaluate, and compare the power of different sequence model backbones in graph tasks. Our theoretical evaluations of the representation power of Transformers and modern recurrent models through the lens of global and local graph tasks show that there are both negative and positive sides for both types of models. Building on this observation, we present GSM++, a fast hybrid model that uses the Hierarchical Affinity Clustering (HAC) algorithm to tokenize the graph into hierarchical sequences, and then employs a hybrid architecture of Transformer to encode these sequences. Our theoretical and experimental results support the design of GSM++, showing that GSM++ outperforms baselines in most benchmark evaluations. View details Towards realistic digital twins: calibrating metropolitan network simulations across multiple cities Chao Zhang Carolina Osorio Neha Arora Yechen Li (2025) Preview Preview abstract This talk explores the critical role of calibration in developing accurate and reliable digital twins of metropolitan transportation networks. We address the challenge of underdetermination in large-scale stochastic simulation calibration, where limited real-world data can hinder accurate counterfactual analysis. To overcome this, we introduce sample-efficient methodologies that leverage metamodels, machine learning, and diverse emerging data sources. Specially, we will discuss the use of abundant path travel times for demand calibration. The enhancement in simulation fidelity is demonstrated through case studies of multiple metropolitan areas in the US. View details Trellis: Learning to Compress Key-Value Memory in Attention Models Vahab Mirrokni Ali Behrouz Mahdi Karami Praneeth Kacham 2025 Preview Preview abstract Transformers, while powerful, suffer from quadratic computational complexity and the ever-growing Key-Value (KV) cache of the attention mechanism. This paper introduces Trellis, a novel Transformer architecture with bounded memory that learns how to compress its key-value memory dynamically at test time. Trellis replaces the standard KV cache with a fixed-size memory and train a two-pass recurrent compression mechanism to store new keys and values into memory. To achieve this, it leverages an online gradient descent procedure with a forget gate, enabling the compressed memory to be updated recursively while learning to retain important contextual information from incoming tokens at test time. Extensive experiments on language modeling, common-sense reasoning, recall-intensive tasks, and time series show that the proposed architecture outperforms strong baselines. Notably, its performance gains increase as the sequence length grows, highlighting its potential for long-context applications. View details Lattice: Learning to Compress the Cache in the Attention Mahdi Karami Razvan Pascanu Vahab Mirrokni 2025 Preview Preview abstract Attention mechanisms have revolutionized sequence learning but suffer from quadratic computational complexity. This paper introduces \model, a novel recurrent neural network (RNN) mechanism that leverages the inherent low-rank structure of K-V matrices to efficiently compress the cache into a fixed number of memory slots, achieving sub-quadratic complexity. We formulate this compression as an online optimization problem and derive a dynamic memory update rule based on a single gradient descent step. The resulting recurrence features a state- and input-dependent gating mechanism, offering an interpretable memory update process. The core innovation is the orthogonal update: each memory slot is updated exclusively with information orthogonal to its current state, hence incorporating only novel, non-redundant data to minimize interference with previously stored information. We derive an efficient computation for this orthogonal update rule and further approximate it with chunk-wise parallelization to ensure training scalability. Empirically, Lattice outperforms strong baselines on language modeling and associative recall tasks across diverse context lengths and model sizes, achieving superior memory efficiency with significantly reduced memory sizes. View details A Unified Analysis of Nonstochastic Delayed Feedback for Combinatorial Semi-Bandits, Linear Bandits, and MDPs Lukas Zierahn Dirk van der Hoeven Tal Lancewicki Aviv Rosenberg Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) (2025) Preview Preview abstract We derive a new analysis of Follow The Regularized Leader (FTRL) for online learning with delayed bandit feedback. By separating the cost of delayed feedback from that of bandit feedback, our analysis allows us to obtain new results in three important settings. On the one hand, we derive the first optimal (up to logarithmic factors) regret bounds for combinatorial semi-bandits with delay and adversarial Markov decision processes with delay (both known and unknown transition functions). On the other hand, we use our analysis to derive an efficient algorithm for linear bandits with delay achieving near-optimal regret bounds. We also show that FTRL remains stable across multiple rounds under mild assumptions on the the regularizer. View details Synthesizing 3D Abstractions by Inverting Procedural Buildings with Transformers Max Dax Jordi Serrano Berbel Jan Stria Leonidas Guibas Urs Bergmann CVPR 2025 SynData4CV Workshop (2025) Preview Preview abstract We generate abstractions of buildings, reflecting the essential aspects of their geometry and structure, by learning to invert procedural models. We first build a dataset of abstract procedural building models paired with simulated point clouds and then learn the inverse mapping through a transformer. Given a point cloud, the trained transformer then infers the corresponding abstracted building in terms of a programmatic language description. This approach leverages expressive procedural models developed for gaming and animation, and thereby retains desirable properties such as efficient rendering of the inferred abstractions and strong priors for regularity and symmetry. Our approach achieves good reconstruction accuracy in terms of geometry and structure, as well as structurally consistent inpainting. View details 43 44 45 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
