 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 151 - 165 of 676 publications chip template Remove Dynamical-generative downscaling of climate model ensembles Ignacio Lopez-Gomez Zhong Yi Wan Leonardo Zepeda-Núñez Tapio Schneider John Anderson Fei Sha Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 122 (2025), e2420288122 Preview Preview abstract Regional high-resolution climate projections are crucial for many applications, such as agriculture, hydrology, and natural hazard risk assessment. Dynamical downscaling, the state-of-the-art method to produce localized future climate information, involves running a regional climate model (RCM) driven by an Earth System Model (ESM), but it is too computationally expensive to apply to large climate projection ensembles. We propose an approach combining dynamical downscaling with generative AI to reduce the cost and improve the uncertainty estimates of downscaled climate projections. In our framework, an RCM dynamically downscales ESM output to an intermediate resolution, followed by a generative diffusion model that further refines the resolution to the target scale. This approach leverages the generalizability of physics-based models and the sampling efficiency of diffusion models, enabling the downscaling of large multimodel ensembles. We evaluate our method against dynamically downscaled climate projections from the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project 6 (CMIP6) ensemble. Our results demonstrate its ability to provide more accurate uncertainty bounds on future regional climate than alternatives such as dynamical downscaling of smaller ensembles, or traditional empirical statistical downscaling methods. We also show that dynamical-generative downscaling results in significantly lower errors than popular statistical downscaling techniques, and captures more accurately the spectra, tail dependence, and multivariate correlations of meteorological fields. These characteristics make the dynamical-generative framework a flexible, accurate, and efficient way to downscale large ensembles of climate projections, currently out of reach for pure dynamical downscaling. View details Day-of-the-week Awareness in Time of Day Breakpoints for Traffic Light Plans Ori Rottenstreich Eliav Buchnik Shai Ferster Tom Kalvari Ron Tsibulsky Danny Veikherman Avishai Zagoury Jack Haddad Dotan Emanuel Avinatan Hassidim 2025 Preview Preview abstract Time-of-day breakpoints (TODs) refer to the times over the day in which the plan of a traffic light is changed. Traditionally, TODs are selected jointly for all weekdays (Monday-Friday), typically with additional TODs dedicated to weekends. In this paper, we present an alternative approach motivated by traffic characteristics that can differ among the weekdays Monday-Friday and consider TODs which are day-of-the-week aware. The traffic-aware approach studies similarities among days and computes TODs that can be shared among days with similar characteristics but can also have other forms for weekdays with unique characteristics. Based on traffic properties derived from anonymized trajectories, we apply the new methodology to compute time-of-day breakpoints that are day-of-the-week aware in the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and estimate the impact of the new methodology. View details On the relationship of speed limit and CO2 emissions in urban traffic Tamás Tettamanti Balázs Varga Ori Rottenstreich Dotan Emanuel Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives, 32 (2025) Preview Preview abstract The paper analyzes the relationship between urban speed limits and vehicle emissions. There is an ongoing trend of reducing speed limits from to for the sake of increasing road safety. However, the impact of this policy on emissions is still unclear. It can be mixed depending on the proportion of dynamic and steady-state driving. While cruising emissions are higher at lower speeds, lower speeds entail less acceleration in urban traffic. Based on our investigation, one network topology feature (road length) and two traffic-related parameters (traffic volume and turning ratio) have been suggested for analysis being the most relevant to affect vehicle emission. Their correlation with potential emission reduction was evaluated using high-fidelity traffic simulation based on traffic scenarios validated with real traffic data. Random forest regression was used to support the optimal selection of zones for speed limit reduction. Traffic simulations on large urban networks prove that emission reductions of over 10% can be achieved in the case of a well-chosen speed limit policy. View details Teamwork makes the dream work: Framing AI agents within transactive memory theory Yehoshua Rubin 2025 Preview Preview abstract Initially conceived as a way to explain memory sharing in romantic couples, the concept of transactive memory systems (TMS) has been adopted by organizational psychology, information management, and other fields of study to examine team performance in corporate settings. While findings highlight a clear advantage for humans teams with TMS, it's not evident if AI-human teams could also develop such a psychological dynamic. This paper considers AI-human interaction through the lens of TMS and identifies potential opportunities for improvement in this area. View details Automating Capacitor Part Selection with Dual-Objective Optimization Jason Grover Luke Brantingham arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper presents a novel framework for optimizing capacitor selection in electronic design using multi-objective linear and non-linear constrained optimization techniques. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach in minimizing cost and board area while meeting critical performance requirements. View details Study of Arterials in the City of Rio de Janeiro for Traffic Coordination Ori Rottenstreich Eliav Buchnik Avishai Zagoury Danny Veikherman Dan Karliner Tom Kalvari Shai Ferster Ron Tsibulsky Jack Haddad Dotan Emanuel Avinatan Hassidim 2025 Preview Preview abstract Urban traffic congestion is a growing challenge, and optimizing signal timing strategies is crucial for improving traffic flow and reducing emissions. The coordination of signalized intersections improves both traffic operations and environmental aspects. Coordination is particularly important along arterials, sequences of signalized intersections that serve as the primary routes and carry a high volume of traffic. In this paper we analyze real data from the city of Rio de Janeiro to study properties of arterials. We refer to their length, the distance between intersections and to the properties of the traffic light plans such as cycle time. We then study their in practice level of coordination in terms of number of stops and their common locations along the arterials. We dive into particular arterials and provide insights that can be useful for efficient design of arterials in additional cities. Based on the analysis, we show how simple traffic properties can indicate the potential upon coordinating two adjacent intersections as part of an arterial in improving traffic performance. View details Fine-grained Measurement of Vehicle Delay Fairness Eliav Buchnik Avishai Zagoury Tom Kalvari Jack Haddad Dotan Emanuel Dan Karliner Danny Veikherman Ron Tsibulsky Shai Ferster Ori Rottenstreich Avinatan Hassidim 2025 Preview Preview abstract Optimizing signal timing in traffic lights helps to improve traffic flow and reduce emissions through reducing delays. At intersections, vehicles from different movements observe different delays impacted by the traffic light plan. This paper analyzes delay fairness among various vehicles at intersections. We refer to three cities: Rio de Janeiro, Hamburg and Seattle with a total number of over 5100 intersections. We present an intuitive methodology to compute delay fairness based on Gini index, a common fairness measure in economics. We evaluate the fairness based on real traffic data and provide insights on the relationship of fairness with day hours and traffic demand. We also examine real changes in traffic light plans that occurred in practice to check whether improving delay is often aligned with increasing fairness. View details An Empirical Study of Time of Day Breakpoints in Traffic Light Plans Eliav Buchnik Avishai Zagoury Tom Kalvari Jack Haddad Dotan Emanuel Dan Karliner Danny Veikherman Shai Ferster Ori Rottenstreich Avinatan Hassidim 2025 Preview Preview abstract Fixed time strategy is a common approach in signal traffic control in which signal plans are simple and periodic, enjoying easy implementation without detection mechanisms. A traffic light is associated with several daily plans, each applied to several consecutive hours. Time-of-day breakpoints (TODs) refer to the times over the day in which the plan is changed. TODs are often selected based on traffic, aiming to divide the day into groups of consecutive hours with similar traffic characteristics within each group of hours. We present a methodology to study time-of-day breakpoints in practice. We use this methodology to estimate and analyze time-of-day breakpoints in the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil based on traffic properties derived from traffic trajectories. Our study examines over 900 of the city intersections. We refer to properties such as the number of daily plans and the times by which plans start. We also provide traffic-aware insights on the potential improvement in the selection of TODs and identify key intersections where adjusting TODs could reduce average delay times. We identify potential improvements in over 8% of the examined intersections. These findings provide valuable insights for traffic engineers seeking to optimize signal timing. View details Global earthquake detection and warning using Android phones Marc Stogaitis Youngmin Cho Richard Allen Mostafa Mousavi Boone Spooner Patrick Robertson Micah Berman Greg Wimpey Robert Bosch Nivetha Thiruverahan Steve Malkos Alexei Barski Science, 389 (2025), pp. 254-259 Preview Preview abstract Earthquake early-warning systems are increasingly being deployed as a strategy to reduce losses in earthquakes, but the regional seismic networks they require do not exist in many earthquake-prone countries. We use the global Android smartphone network to develop an earthquake detection capability, an alert delivery system, and a user feedback framework. Over 3 years of operation, the system detected an average of 312 earthquakes per month with magnitudes from M 1.9 to M 7.8 in Türkiye. Alerts were delivered in 98 countries for earthquakes with M ≥4.5, corresponding to ~60 events and 18 million alerts per month. User feedback shows that 85% of people receiving an alert felt shaking, and 36, 28, and 23% received the alert before, during, and after shaking, respectively. We show how smartphone-based earthquake detection algorithms can be implemented at scale and improved through postevent analysis. View details Reasoning-SQL: Reinforcement Learning with Partial Rewards for Reasoning-Enhanced Text-to-SQL Mohammadreza Pourreza Shayan Talaei Ruoxi Sun Xingchen Wan Hailong Li Azalia Mirhoseini Amin Saberi Sercan Arik Conference on Language Modeling (COLM) (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Text-to-SQL is a challenging task involving multiple reasoning-intensive subtasks, including natural language understanding, database schema comprehension, and precise SQL query formulation. Existing approaches often rely on handcrafted reasoning paths with inductive biases that can limit their overall effectiveness. Motivated by the recent success of reasoning-enhanced models such as DeepSeek R1 and OpenAI o1, which effectively leverage reward-driven self-exploration to enhance reasoning capabilities and generalization, we propose a novel set of partial rewards tailored specifically for the Text-to-SQL task. Our reward set includes schema-linking, AI feedback, n-gram similarity, and syntax check, explicitly designed to address the reward sparsity issue prevalent in reinforcement learning (RL). Leveraging group relative policy optimization (GRPO), our approach explicitly encourages large language models (LLMs) to develop intrinsic reasoning skills necessary for accurate SQL query generation. With models of different sizes, we demonstrate that RL-only training with our proposed rewards consistently achieves higher accuracy and superior generalization compared to supervised fine-tuning (SFT). Remarkably, our RL-trained 14B-parameter model significantly outperforms larger proprietary models, e.g. o3-mini by 4% and Gemini-1.5-Pro-002 by 3% on the BIRD benchmark. These highlight the efficacy of our proposed RL-training framework with partial rewards for enhancing both accuracy and reasoning capabilities in Text-to-SQL tasks. View details Breaking the Quadratic Barrier: Robust Cardinality Sketches for Adaptive Queries Edith Cohen Mihir Singhal Uri Stemmer ICML 2025 Preview Preview abstract Cardinality sketches are compact data structures that efficiently estimate the number of distinct elements across multiple queries while minimizing storage, communication, and computational costs. However, recent research has shown that these sketches can fail under adaptively chosen queries, breaking down after approximately $\tilde{O}(k^2)$ queries, where $k$ is the sketch size. In this work, we overcome this quadratic barrier by designing robust estimators with fine-grained guarantees. Specifically, our constructions can handle an exponential number of adaptive queries, provided that each element participates in at most $\tilde{O}(k^2)$ queries. This effectively shifts the quadratic barrier from the total number of queries to the number of queries sharing the same element, which can be significantly smaller. Beyond cardinality sketches, our approach expands the toolkit for robust algorithm design. View details Nearly Optimal Sample Complexity for Learning with Label Proportions Robert Busa-Fekete Travis Dick Claudio Gentile Haim Kaplan Tomer Koren Uri Stemmer ICML 2025 Preview Preview abstract We investigate Learning from Label Proportions (LLP), a partial information setting where examples in a training set are grouped into bags, and only aggregate label values in each bag are available. Despite the partial observability, the goal is still to achieve small regret at the level of individual examples. We give results on the sample complexity of LLP under square loss, showing that our sample complexity is essentially optimal. From an algorithmic viewpoint, we rely on carefully designed variants of Empirical Risk Minimization, and Stochastic Gradient Descent algorithms, combined with ad hoc variance reduction techniques. On one hand, our theoretical results improve in important ways on the existing literature on LLP, specifically in the way the sample complexity depends on the bag size. On the other hand, we validate our algorithmic solutions on several datasets, demonstrating improved empirical performance (better accuracy for less samples) against recent baselines. View details Data Reconstruction: When You See It and When You Don't Edith Cohen Haim Kaplan Yishay Mansour Shay Moran Kobbi Nissim Uri Stemmer Eliad Tsfadia ITCS 2025 Preview Preview abstract We revisit the fundamental question of formally defining what constitutes a reconstruction attack. While often clear from the context, our exploration reveals that a precise definition is much more nuanced than it appears, to the extent that a single all-encompassing definition may not exist. Thus, we employ a different strategy and aim to "sandwich" the concept of reconstruction attacks by addressing two complementing questions: (i) What conditions guarantee that a given system is protected against such attacks? (ii) Under what circumstances does a given attack clearly indicate that a system is not protected? More specifically, * We introduce a new definitional paradigm -- Narcissus Resiliency -- to formulate a security definition for protection against reconstruction attacks. This paradigm has a self-referential nature that enables it to circumvent shortcomings of previously studied notions of security. Furthermore, as a side-effect, we demonstrate that Narcissus resiliency captures as special cases multiple well-studied concepts including differential privacy and other security notions of one-way functions and encryption schemes. * We formulate a link between reconstruction attacks and Kolmogorov complexity. This allows us to put forward a criterion for evaluating when such attacks are convincingly successful. View details On Differentially Private Linear Algebra Haim Kaplan Yishay Mansour Shay Moran Uri Stemmer Nitzan Tur STOC 2025 Preview Preview abstract We introduce efficient differentially private (DP) algorithms for several linear algebraic tasks, including solving linear equalities over arbitrary fields, linear inequalities over the reals, and computing affine spans and convex hulls. As an application, we obtain efficient DP algorithms for learning halfspaces and affine subspaces. Our algorithms addressing equalities are strongly polynomial, whereas those addressing inequalities are weakly polynomial. Furthermore, this distinction is inevitable: no DP algorithm for linear programming can be strongly polynomial-time efficient. View details Data Quality Issues in Multilingual Speech Datasets: The Need for Sociolinguistic Awareness and Proactive Language Planning Mingfei Lau Allen Chen Yeming Fang Tingting Xu Tongzhou Chen Pavel Golik Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL), Vienna, Austria (2025), 7466–7492 Preview 11 12 13 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
