 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 61 - 75 of 676 publications chip template Remove Online-EYE: Multimodal Implicit Eye Tracking Calibration for XR Baosheng James Hou Lucy Abramyan Prasanthi Gurumurthy Khushman Patel Ivana Tosic Eric Gonzalez Haley Adams Andrea Colaco Ken Pfeuffer Hans Gellersen Karan Ahuja Mar Gonzalez Franco 2025 Preview Preview abstract Unlike other inputs for VR that work out of the box, eye tracking typically requires custom calibration per user or session. We present a multimodal inputs approach for implicit calibration of eye tracker in VR, leveraging UI interaction for continuous, background calibration. Our method analyzes gaze data alongside controller interaction with UI elements, and employing ML techniques it continuously refines the calibration matrix without interrupting users from their current tasks. Potentially eliminating the need for explicit calibration. We demonstrate the accuracy and effectiveness of this implicit approach across various tasks and real time applications achieving comparable eye tracking accuracy to native, explicit calibration. View details Validation of a Deep Learning Model for Diabetic Retinopathy on Patients with Young-Onset Diabetes Tony Tan-Torres Pradeep Praveen Divleen Jeji Arthur Brant Xiang Yin Lu Yang Preeti Singh Tayyeba Ali Ilana Traynis Dushyantsinh Jadeja Rajroshan Sawhney Dale Webster Naama Hammel Yun Liu Kasumi Widner Sunny Virmani Pradeep Venkatesh Jonathan Krause Nikhil Tandon Ophthalmology and Therapy (2025) Preview Preview abstract Introduction While many deep learning systems (DLSs) for diabetic retinopathy (DR) have been developed and validated on cohorts with an average age of 50s or older, fewer studies have examined younger individuals. This study aimed to understand DLS performance for younger individuals, who tend to display anatomic differences, such as prominent retinal sheen. This sheen can be mistaken for exudates or cotton wool spots, and potentially confound DLSs. Methods This was a prospective cross-sectional cohort study in a “Diabetes of young” clinic in India, enrolling 321 individuals between ages 18 and 45 (98.8% with type 1 diabetes). Participants had fundus photographs taken and the photos were adjudicated by experienced graders to obtain reference DR grades. We defined a younger cohort (age 18–25) and an older cohort (age 26–45) and examined differences in DLS performance between the two cohorts. The main outcome measures were sensitivity and specificity for DR. Results Eye-level sensitivity for moderate-or-worse DR was 97.6% [95% confidence interval (CI) 91.2, 98.2] for the younger cohort and 94.0% [88.8, 98.1] for the older cohort (p = 0.418 for difference). The specificity for moderate-or-worse DR significantly differed between the younger and older cohorts, 97.9% [95.9, 99.3] and 92.1% [87.6, 96.0], respectively (p = 0.008). Similar trends were observed for diabetic macular edema (DME); sensitivity was 79.0% [57.9, 93.6] for the younger cohort and 77.5% [60.8, 90.6] for the older cohort (p = 0.893), whereas specificity was 97.0% [94.5, 99.0] and 92.0% [88.2, 95.5] (p = 0.018). Retinal sheen presence (94% of images) was associated with DME presence (p View details Heterogeneous graph neural networks for species distribution modeling Lauren Harrell Christine Kaeser-Chen Burcu Karagol Ayan Keith Anderson Michelangelo Conserva Elise Kleeman Maxim Neumann Matt Overlan Millie Chapman Drew Purves arxiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Species distribution models (SDMs) are necessary for measuring and predicting occurrences and habitat suitability of species and their relationship with environmental factors. We introduce a novel presence-only SDM with graph neural networks (GNN). In our model, species and locations are treated as two distinct node sets, and the learning task is predicting detection records as the edges that connect locations to species. Using GNN for SDM allows us to model fine-grained interactions between species and the environment. We evaluate the potential of this methodology on the six-region dataset compiled by National Center for Ecological Analysis and Synthesis (NCEAS) for benchmarking SDMs. For each of the regions, the heterogeneous GNN model is comparable to or outperforms previously-benchmarked single-species SDMs as well as a feed-forward neural network baseline model. View details Understanding Architectural Complexity, Maintenance Burden, and Developer Sentiment -- A Large-Scale Study Yuanfang Cai Lanting He Jun Qian Yony Kochinski Nan Zhang Ciera Jaspan Antonio Bianco 2025 Preview Preview abstract Intuitively, the more complex a software system is, the harder it is to maintain. Statistically, it is not clear which complexity measures correlate with maintenance effort; in fact, it is not even clear how to objectively measure maintenance burden, so that developers’ sentiment and intuition can be supported by numbers. Without effective complexity and maintenance measures, it remains difficult to objectively monitor maintenance, control complexity, or justify refactoring. In this paper, we report a large-scale study of 1200+ projects written in C++ and Java from Google LLC. In this study, we collected three categories of measures: (1) architectural complexity, measured using propagation cost (PC), decoupling level (DL), and structural anti-patterns; (2) maintenance activity, measured using the number of changes, lines of code (LOC) written, and active coding time (ACT) spent on feature-addition vs. bug-fixing, and (3) developer sentiment on complexity and productivity, collected from 7200 survey responses. We statistically analysed the correlations among these measures and obtained significant evidence of the following findings: 1) the more complex the architecture is (higher propagation cost, more instances of anti-patterns), the more LOC is spent on bug-fixing, rather than adding new features; 2) developers who commit more changes for features, spend more lines of code on features, or spend more time on features also feel that they are less hindered by technical debt and complexity. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first large-scale empirical study establishing the statistical correlation among architectural complexity, maintenance activity, and developer sentiment. The implication is that, instead of solely relying upon developer sentiment and intuitions to detect degraded structure or increased burden to evolve, it is possible to objectively and continuously measure and monitor architectural complexity and maintenance difficulty, increasing feature delivery efficiency by reducing architectural complexity and anti-patterns. View details Snap-it, Tap-it, Splat-it: Tactile-Informed 3D Gaussian Splatting for Reconstructing Challenging Surfaces Mauro Comi Alessio Tonioni Max Yang Jonathan Tremblay Valts Blukis Yijiong Lin Nathan Lepora Laurence Aitchison 2025 Preview Preview abstract Touch and vision go hand in hand, mutually enhancing our ability to understand the world. From a research perspective, the problem of mixing touch and vision is underexplored and presents interesting challenges. To this end, we propose Tactile-Informed 3DGS, a novel approach that incorporates touch data (local depth maps) with multi-view vision data to achieve surface reconstruction and novel view synthesis. Our method optimises 3D Gaussian primitives to accurately model the object's geometry at points of contact. By creating a framework that decreases the transmittance at touch locations, we achieve a refined surface reconstruction, ensuring a uniformly smooth depth map. Touch is particularly useful when considering non-Lambertian objects (e.g. shiny or reflective surfaces) since contemporary methods tend to fail to reconstruct with fidelity specular highlights. By combining vision and tactile sensing, we achieve more accurate geometry reconstructions with fewer images than prior methods. We conduct evaluation on objects with glossy and reflective surfaces and demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, offering significant improvements in reconstruction quality. View details Measuring Productivity: All Models are Wrong But Some are Useful Ciera Jaspan Collin Green IEEE Software, 42 (2025), pp. 13-17 Preview Preview abstract Measuring productivity is equivalent to building a model. All models are wrong, but some are useful. Productivity models are often “worryingly selective” (wrong because of omissions). Worrying selectivity can be combated by taking a holistic approach that includes multiple measurements of multiple outcomes. Productivity models should include multiple outcomes, metrics, and methods. View details Development and Evaluation of ML Models for Cardiotocography Interpretation Nicole Chiou Nichole Young-Lin Abdoulaye Diack Christopher Kelly Julie Cattiau Tiya Tiyasirichokchai Sanmi Koyejo Katherine Heller Mercy Asiedu NPJ Women's Health (2025) Preview Preview abstract The inherent variability in the visual interpretation of cardiotocograms (CTGs) by obstetric clinical experts, both intra- and inter-observer, presents a substantial challenge in obstetric care. In response, we investigate automated CTG interpretation as a potential solution to enhance the early detection of fetal hypoxia during labor, thereby reducing unnecessary operative interventions and improving overall maternal and neonatal care. This study employs deep learning techniques to reduce the subjectivity associated with visual CTG interpretation. Our results demonstrate that employing objective cord blood pH measurements, rather than clinician-defined Apgar scores, yields more consistent and robust model performance. Additionally, through a series of ablation studies, we investigate the impact of temporal distribution shifts on the performance of these deep learning models. We examine tradeoffs between performance and fairness, specifically evaluating performance across demographic and clinical subgroups. Finally, we discuss the practical implications of our findings for the real-world deployment of such systems, emphasizing their potential utility in medical settings with limited resources. View details AfriMed-QA: A Pan-African Multi-Specialty Medical Question-Answering Benchmark Dataset Tobi Olatunji Abraham Toluwase Owodunni Charles Nimo Jennifer Orisakwe Henok Biadglign Ademtew Chris Fourie Foutse Yuehgoh Jonas Kemp Stephen Moore Mardhiyah Sanni Emmanuel Ayodele Irfan Essa Timothy Faniran Bonaventure F. P. Dossou Fola Omofoye Wendy Kinara Tassallah Abdullahi Michael Best Katherine Heller Mercy Asiedu 2025 Preview Preview abstract Recent advancements in large language model (LLM) performance on medical multiple-choice question (MCQ) benchmarks have stimulated significant interest from patients and healthcare providers globally. Particularly in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) facing acute physician shortages and lack of specialists, LLMs offer a potentially scalable pathway to enhance healthcare access and reduce costs. However, LLM training data is sourced from predominantly Western text, existing benchmarks are predominantly Western-centric, limited to MCQs, and focused on a narrow range of clinical specialties, raising concerns about their applicability in the Global South, particularly across Africa where localized medical knowledge and linguistic diversity are often underrepresented. In this work, we introduce AfriMed-QA, the first large-scale multi-specialty Pan-African medical Question-Answer (QA) dataset designed to evaluate and develop equitable and effective LLMs for African healthcare. It contains 3,000 multiple-choice professional medical exam questions with answers and rationale, 1,500 short answer questions (SAQ) with long-from answers, and 5,500 consumer queries, sourced from over 60 medical schools across 15 countries, covering 32 medical specialties. We further rigorously evaluate multiple open, closed, general, and biomedical LLMs across multiple axes including accuracy, consistency, factuality, bias, potential for harm, local geographic relevance, medical reasoning, and recall. We believe this dataset provides a valuable resource for practical application of large language models in African healthcare and enhances the geographical diversity of health-LLM benchmark datasets. View details The Multicultural Medical Assistant: Can LLMs Improve Medical ASR Errors Across Borders? Ayo Adedeji Sarita Joshi 2025 Preview Preview abstract The global adoption of Large Language Models (LLMs) in healthcare shows promise for enhancing clinical workflows and improving patient outcomes. However, Automatic Speech Recognition (ASR) errors in critical medical entities remain a significant challenge. These errors can lead to severe consequences if undetected. This study investigates the prevalence and impact of ASR errors in medical transcription across Africa, Europe, and North America. By examining variations in accented English across three continents, we analyze the impact of regional speech patterns on ASR performance. Our research quantifies both the potential and limitations of LLMs in mitigating ASR inaccuracies within various medical settings, with particular attention to performance variations across regional accents and medical terminology. Our findings highlight significant disparities in ASR accuracy across regions and identify specific conditions under which LLM corrections prove most effective. View details Performance of a Deep Learning Diabetic Retinopathy Algorithm in India Arthur Brant Preeti Singh Xiang Yin Lu Yang Jay Nayar Divleen Jeji Yossi Matias Greg Corrado Dale Webster Sunny Virmani Anchintha Meenu Naresh Babu Kannan Jonathan Krause Florence Thng Lily Peng Yun Liu Kasumi Widner Ramasamy Kim JAMA Network Open (2025) Preview Preview abstract Importance: While prospective studies have investigated the accuracy of artificial intelligence (AI) for detection of diabetic retinopathy (DR) and diabetic macular edema (DME), to date, little published data exist on the clinical performance of these algorithms. Objective: To evaluate the clinical performance of an automated retinal disease assessment (ARDA) algorithm in the postdeployment setting at Aravind Eye Hospital in India. Design, Setting, and Participants: This cross-sectional analysis involved an approximate 1% sample of fundus photographs from patients screened using ARDA. Images were graded via adjudication by US ophthalmologists for DR and DME, and ARDA’s output was compared against the adjudicated grades at 45 sites in Southern India. Patients were randomly selected between January 1, 2019, and July 31, 2023. Main Outcomes and Measures: Primary analyses were the sensitivity and specificity of ARDA for severe nonproliferative DR (NPDR) or proliferative DR (PDR). Secondary analyses focused on sensitivity and specificity for sight-threatening DR (STDR) (DME or severe NPDR or PDR). Results: Among the 4537 patients with 4537 images with adjudicated grades, mean (SD) age was 55.2 (11.9) years and 2272 (50.1%) were male. Among the 3941 patients with gradable photographs, 683 (17.3%) had any DR, 146 (3.7%) had severe NPDR or PDR, 109 (2.8%) had PDR, and 398 (10.1%) had STDR. ARDA’s sensitivity and specificity for severe NPDR or PDR were 97.0% (95% CI, 92.6%-99.2%) and 96.4% (95% CI, 95.7%-97.0%), respectively. Positive predictive value (PPV) was 50.7% and negative predictive value (NPV) was 99.9%. The clinically important miss rate for severe NPDR or PDR was 0% (eg, some patients with severe NPDR or PDR were interpreted as having moderate DR and referred to clinic). ARDA’s sensitivity for STDR was 95.9% (95% CI, 93.0%-97.4%) and specificity was 94.9% (95% CI, 94.1%-95.7%); PPV and NPV were 67.9% and 99.5%, respectively. Conclusions and Relevance: In this cross-sectional study investigating the clinical performance of ARDA, sensitivity and specificity for severe NPDR and PDR exceeded 96% and caught 100% of patients with severe NPDR and PDR for ophthalmology referral. This preliminary large-scale postmarketing report of the performance of ARDA after screening 600 000 patients in India underscores the importance of monitoring and publication an algorithm's clinical performance, consistent with recommendations by regulatory bodies. View details Shadow Hamiltonian Simulation Rolando Somma Robbie King Robin Kothari Tom O'Brien Ryan Babbush Nature Communications, 16 (2025), pp. 2690 Preview Preview abstract Simulating quantum dynamics is one of the most important applications of quantum computers. Traditional approaches for quantum simulation involve preparing the full evolved state of the system and then measuring some physical quantity. Here, we present a different and novel approach to quantum simulation that uses a compressed quantum state that we call the "shadow state". The amplitudes of this shadow state are proportional to the time-dependent expectations of a specific set of operators of interest, and it evolves according to its own Schrödinger equation. This evolution can be simulated on a quantum computer efficiently under broad conditions. Applications of this approach to quantum simulation problems include simulating the dynamics of exponentially large systems of free fermions or free bosons, the latter example recovering a recent algorithm for simulating exponentially many classical harmonic oscillators. These simulations are hard for classical methods and also for traditional quantum approaches, as preparing the full states would require exponential resources. Shadow Hamiltonian simulation can also be extended to simulate expectations of more complex operators such as two-time correlators or Green's functions, and to study the evolution of operators themselves in the Heisenberg picture. View details A Scalable Framework for Evaluating Health Language Models Neil Mallinar Ali Heydari Xin Liu Tony Faranesh Brent Winslow Nova Hammerquist Ben Graef Cathy Speed Mark Malhotra Shwetak Patel Xavi Prieto Daniel McDuff Ahmed Metwally (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as powerful tools for analyzing complex datasets. Recent studies demonstrate their potential to generate useful, personalized responses when provided with patient-specific health information that encompasses lifestyle, biomarkers, and context. As LLM-driven health applications are increasingly adopted, rigorous and efficient one-sided evaluation methodologies are crucial to ensure response quality across multiple dimensions, including accuracy, personalization and safety. Current evaluation practices for open-ended text responses heavily rely on human experts. This approach introduces human factors and is often cost-prohibitive, labor-intensive, and hinders scalability, especially in complex domains like healthcare where response assessment necessitates domain expertise and considers multifaceted patient data. In this work, we introduce Adaptive Precise Boolean rubrics: an evaluation framework that streamlines human and automated evaluation of open-ended questions by identifying gaps in model responses using a minimal set of targeted rubrics questions. Our approach is based on recent work in more general evaluation settings that contrasts a smaller set of complex evaluation targets with a larger set of more precise, granular targets answerable with simple boolean responses. We validate this approach in metabolic health, a domain encompassing diabetes, cardiovascular disease, and obesity. Our results demonstrate that Adaptive Precise Boolean rubrics yield higher inter-rater agreement among expert and non-expert human evaluators, and in automated assessments, compared to traditional Likert scales, while requiring approximately half the evaluation time of Likert-based methods. This enhanced efficiency, particularly in automated evaluation and non-expert contributions, paves the way for more extensive and cost-effective evaluation of LLMs in health. View details From the Observability TAG: Designing a Common Query Language for Observability Data Alolita Sharma Chris Larsen Pereira Braga (2025) Preview Preview abstract Unifying query languages is key in reducing toil for app developers and end users to query and analyze observability data. A common query language that can leverage all observability data such as metrics, traces, profiles, events, logs to facilitate correlation, support trend analytics and provide end-to-end observability for AI applications. The Observability TAG QLS workgroup is finalizing a semantic query language spec in 2025 and is recommending SQL as a basis with further experimentation on syntaxes. This talk will explore the design principles, user research and challenges of creating a query language to support observability goals. It will delve into the core concepts, syntax, and semantics of SQL operators and its needed syntactic sugar, while addressing the unique requirements of observability data. It will also explore the trade-offs between simplicity, expressiveness, and performance. This query language convergence for end-to-end analytics could enhance reliability and operational efficiency for SREs and your app developers. A win-win for all. View details Why is My Route Different Today? An Algorithm for Explaining Route Selection Aaron Schild Sreenivas Gollapudi Anupam Gupta Kostas Kollias Ali Sinop ACDA (2025) Preview Preview abstract Users of routing services like Apple Maps, Google Maps, and Waze frequently wonder why a given route is proposed. This question particularly arises when dynamic conditions like traffic and road closures cause unusual routes to be proposed. While many such dynamic conditions may exist in a road network at any time, only a small fraction of those conditions are typically relevant to a given user's route. In this work, we give a simple algorithm that identifies a small set of traffic-laden road segments that answer the following question: Which traffic conditions cause a particular shortest traffic-aware route to differ from the shortest traffic-free route? We theoretically and experimentally show that our algorithm generates small and interpretable answers to this question. View details Online Distributed Queue Length Estimation Aditya Bhaskara Sreenivas Gollapudi Sungjin Im Kostas Kollias Kamesh Munagala ACDA (2025) Preview Preview abstract Delay monitoring is a commonly arising problem in applications such as queue management systems, scheduling, and traffic monitoring. Motivated by such applications, we formulate a queue monitoring problem, where there is a FIFO queue with arbitrary arrivals and departures, and a server needs to monitor the length of a queue by using (decentralized) pings from packets in the queue. Packets can send pings informing the server about the number of packets ahead of them in the queue. Via novel online algorithms and lower bounds, we tightly characterize the trade-off between the number of pings sent and the accuracy of the server's real time estimates. Further, our approximate estimates can be made to be accurate to an arbitrary precision. View details 5 6 7 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
