 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 601 - 615 of 676 publications chip template Remove UMAMI: Unifying Masked Autoregressive Models and Deterministic Rendering for View Synthesis Thanh-Tung Le Tuan Pham Tung Nguyen Deying Kong Xiaohui Xie Stephan Mandt 2025 Preview Preview abstract Novel view synthesis (NVS) seeks to render photorealistic, 3D‑consistent images of a scene from unseen camera poses given only a sparse set of posed views. Existing deterministic networks render observed regions quickly but blur unobserved areas, whereas stochastic diffusion‑based methods hallucinate plausible content yet incur heavy training‑ and inference‑time costs. In this paper, we propose a hybrid framework that unifies the strengths of both paradigms. A bidirectional transformer encodes multi‑view image tokens and Plücker‑ray embeddings, producing a shared latent representation. Two lightweight heads then act on this representation: (i) a feed‑forward regression head that renders pixels where geometry is well constrained, and (ii) a masked autoregressive diffusion head that completes occluded or unseen regions. The entire model is trained end‑to‑end with joint photometric and diffusion losses, without handcrafted 3D inductive biases, enabling scalability across diverse scenes. Experiments demonstrate that our method attains state‑of‑the‑art image quality while reducing rendering time by an order of magnitude compared with fully generative baselines. View details Snap & Replay: A new way to analyze uarch-scale performance bottlenecks for ML accelerators Ioannis Zarkadas Amanda Tomlinson Asaf Cidon Baris Kasikci Ofir Weisse Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing, Association for Computing Machinery, 283–298 Preview Preview abstract As models become larger, ML accelerators are a scarce resource whose performance must be continually optimized to improve efficiency. Existing performance analysis tools are coarse grained, and fail to capture model performance at the machine-code level. In addition, these tools often do not provide specific recommendations for optimizations. We present SnR, a fine-grained methodology for analyzing ML models at the machine-code level that provides actionable optimization suggestions. Our core insight is to use a hardware-level simulator, an artifact of the hardware design process that we can re-purpose for performance analysis. SnR captures traces from production deployments running on accelerators and replays them in a modified microarchitecture simulator to gain low-level insights into the model’s performance. We implement SnR for our in-house accelerator and used it to analyze the performance of several of our production LLMs, revealing several previously-unknown microarchitecture inefficiencies. Based on these findings, we implement optimizations that have decreased token generation latency for our already highly-optimized production LLMs by up to 4.1%. (*) Ioannis Zarkadas and Amanda Tomlinson are equal-contribution co-authors to this work. View details LegalSim: Multi-Agent Simulation of Legal Systems for Discovering Procedural Exploits Sanket Badhe 2025 Preview Preview abstract We present LegalSim, a modular multi-agent simulation of adversarial legal proceedings that explores how AI systems can exploit procedural weaknesses in codified rules. Plaintiff and defendant agents choose from a constrained action space (for example, discovery requests, motions, meet-and-confer, sanctions) governed by a JSON rules engine, while a stochastic judge model with calibrated grant rates, cost allocations, and sanction tendencies resolves outcomes. We compare four policies: PPO, a contextual bandit with an LLM, a direct LLM policy, and a hand-crafted heuristic; Instead of optimizing binary case outcomes, agents are trained and evaluated using effective win rate and a composite exploit score that combines opponent-cost inflation, calendar pressure, settlement pressure at low merit, and a rule-compliance margin. Across configurable regimes (e.g., bankruptcy stays, inter partes review, tax procedures) and heterogeneous judges, we observe emergent ``exploit chains'', such as cost-inflating discovery sequences and calendar-pressure tactics that remain procedurally valid yet systemically harmful. Evaluation via cross-play and Bradley-Terry ratings shows, PPO wins more often, the bandit is the most consistently competitive across opponents, the LLM trails them, and the heuristic is weakest. The results are stable in judge settings, and the simulation reveals emergent exploit chains, motivating red-teaming of legal rule systems in addition to model-level testing. View details ScamAgents: How AI Agents Can Simulate Human-Level Scam Calls Sanket Badhe 2025 Preview Preview abstract Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive fluency and reasoning capabilities, but their potential for misuse has raised growing concern. In this paper, we present ScamAgent, an autonomous multi-turn agent built on top of LLMs, capable of generating highly realistic scam call scripts that simulate real-world fraud scenarios. Unlike prior work focused on single-shot prompt misuse, ScamAgent maintains dialogue memory, adapts dynamically to simulated user responses, and employs deceptive persuasion strategies across conversational turns. We show that current LLM safety guardrails, including refusal mechanisms and content filters, are ineffective against such agent-based threats. Even models with strong prompt-level safeguards can be bypassed when prompts are decomposed, disguised, or delivered incrementally within an agent framework. We further demonstrate the transformation of scam scripts into lifelike voice calls using modern text-to-speech systems, completing a fully automated scam pipeline. Our findings highlight an urgent need for multi-turn safety auditing, agent-level control frameworks, and new methods to detect and disrupt conversational deception powered by generative AI. View details ZAPBench: a benchmark for whole-brain activity prediction in zebrafish Jan-Matthis Lückmann Alex Immer Alex Bo-Yuan Chen Peter Li Mariela Petkova Nirmala Iyer Luuk Hesselink Aparna Dev Gudrun Ihrke Woohyun Park Alyson Petruncio Aubrey Weigel Wyatt Korff Florian Engert Jeff W. Lichtman Misha Ahrens Michał Januszewski Viren Jain International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Data-driven benchmarks have led to significant progress in key scientific modeling domains including weather and structural biology. Here, we present the Zebrafish Activity Prediction Benchmark (ZAPBench), which quantitatively measures progress on the problem of predicting cellular-resolution neural activity throughout an entire vertebrate brain. The benchmark is based on a novel dataset containing 4d light-sheet microscopy recordings of more than 70,000 neurons in a larval zebrafish brain, along with motion stabilized and voxel-level cell segmentations of these data that facilitate development of a variety of forecasting methods. Initial results from a selection of time series and volumetric video modeling approaches achieve better performance than naive baseline methods, but also show room for further improvement. The specific brain used in the activity recording is also undergoing synaptic-level anatomical mapping, which will enable future integration of detailed structural information into ZAP forecasting methods. View details Forecasting Extreme Production Outages in Agile, Big Data and Machine Learning Services: Simple, Two-Parameter Software Reliability Models for Root Cause Insights K. S. Yim 2025 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (BigData), IEEE (2025), pp. 3914-3923 Preview Preview abstract Time series forecasting models have diverse real-world applications, yet forecasting sporadic or spiky production outages of cloud computing services remains a challenging target. Traditional one-parameter Software Reliability Growth Models (SRGMs) are inadequate for accurately estimating outages in modern agile software environments for big data computing. This inadequacy stems from the continuous introduction and removal of defects, constantly evolving total defect counts, and non-constant defect detection rates in agile software, further complicated by operational issues like release and deployment challenges contributing to outages. In this paper, we address these limitations by optimizing a fundamental reliability model to estimate aggregated time series of sporadic, spiky production outages of big data machine learning (ML) services. Our analysis utilizes three years of production incident statistics from planet-scale services with billions of users. We conduct a comprehensive curve fitting study across daily, weekly, and monthly aggregated outage counts against a total of 55 standard distribution functions. We empirically demonstrate that two-parameter distributions, specifically beta and wrapped Cauchy, consistently provide the best fit for total production outages across all granularities, highlighting the necessity of multi-parameter models for agile software reliability. Furthermore, by classifying outages by their root cause type (e.g., experiments, ML, and migration) based on manual post-mortem analyses, we find that root cause-specific outages often represent even more extreme events than total outage counts, requiring two- or multi-parameter models for accurate forecasting. This granular understanding is crucial for big data service operators (e.g., on-call engineers) to identify root causes and apply mitigation techniques in a timely manner. View details Light-microscopy-based dense connectomic reconstruction of mammalian brain tissue Mojtaba R. Tavakoli Julia Lyudchik Michał Januszewski Vitali Vistunou Nathalie Agudelo Duenas Jakob Vorlaufer Christoph Sommer Caroline Kreuzinger Barbara de Souza Oliveira Alban Cenameri Gaia Novarino Viren Jain Johann Danzl Nature (2025) Preview Preview abstract The information-processing capability of the brain’s cellular network depends on the physical wiring pattern between neurons and their molecular and functional characteristics. Charting neurons and resolving the individual synaptic connections requires volumetric imaging at nanoscale resolution and comprehensive cellular contrast. Light microscopy is uniquely positioned to visualize specific molecules but dense, synapse-level circuit reconstruction by light microscopy has been out of reach due to limitations in resolution, contrast, and volumetric imaging capability. Here we developed light-microscopy based connectomics (LICONN). We integrated hydrogel embedding and expansion with comprehensive deep-learning based segmentation and analysis of connectivity, thus directly incorporating molecular information in synapse-level brain tissue reconstructions. LICONN will allow synapse-level brain tissue phenotyping in biological experiments in a readily adoptable manner. View details Connectome-driven neural inventory of a complete visual system Harald Hess C Shan Xu Stuart Berg Gary Huang John Bogovic Christopher Knecht Christopher Ordish Stephan Preibisch Jan Funke Ken Hayworth Michał Januszewski Stephen Plaza Shin-ya Takemura Umayam Lowell Stephan Saalfeld William Katz Gerry Rubin Michael B. Reiser Nature (2025) Preview Preview abstract Vision provides animals with detailed information about their surroundings, conveying diverse features such as color, form, and movement across the visual scene. Computing these parallel spatial features requires a large and diverse network of neurons, such that in animals as distant as flies and humans, visual regions comprise half the brain’s volume. These visual brain regions often reveal remarkable structure-function relationships, with neurons organized along spatial maps with shapes that directly relate to their roles in visual processing. To unravel the stunning diversity of a complex visual system, a careful mapping of the neural architecture matched to tools for targeted exploration of that circuitry is essential. Here, we report a new connectome of the right optic lobe from a male Drosophila central nervous system FIB-SEM volume and a comprehensive inventory of the fly’s visual neurons. We developed a computational framework to quantify the anatomy of visual neurons, establishing a basis for interpreting how their shapes relate to spatial vision. By integrating this analysis with connectivity information, neurotransmitter identity, and expert curation, we classified the ~53,000 neurons into 727 types, about half of which are systematically described and named for the first time. Finally, we share an extensive collection of split-GAL4 lines matched to our neuron type catalog. Together, this comprehensive set of tools and data unlock new possibilities for systematic investigations of vision in Drosophila, a foundation for a deeper understanding of sensory processing. View details Highly accurate assembly polishing with DeepPolisher Mira Mastoras Mobin Asri Lucas Brambrink Prajna Hebbar Alexey Kolesnikov Daniel Cook Maria Nattestad Julian K. Lucas Taylor S. Won Pi-Chuan Chang Andrew Carroll Benedict Paten Kishwar Shafin Genome Research (2025) Preview Preview abstract Accurate genome assemblies are essential for biological research, but even the highest-quality assemblies retain errors caused by the technologies used to construct them. Base-level errors are typically fixed with an additional polishing step that uses reads aligned to the draft assembly to identify necessary edits. However, current methods struggle to find a balance between over- and underpolishing. Here, we present an encoder-only transformer model for assembly polishing called DeepPolisher, which predicts corrections to the underlying sequence using Pacific Biosciences (PacBio) HiFi read alignments to a diploid assembly. Our pipeline introduces a method, PHAsing Reads in Areas Of Homozygosity (PHARAOH), which uses ultralong Oxford Nanopore Technologies (ONT) data to ensure alignments are accurately phased and to correctly introduce heterozygous edits in falsely homozygous regions. We demonstrate that the DeepPolisher pipeline can reduce assembly errors by approximately half, mostly driven by reductions in indel errors. We have applied our DeepPolisher-based pipeline to 180 assemblies from the next Human Pangenome Reference Consortium (HPRC) data release, producing an average predicted quality value (QV) improvement of 3.4 (54% error reduction) for the majority of the genome. View details Heterogeneous Graph Model for Predictive Impact Analysis in Validated Systems RK Neelakandan Teginder Singh Bakul Patel Technical Disclosure Commons (2025) Preview Preview abstract Assessing the impact of system modifications in regulated computing environments, such as on cloud platforms or on-premise servers, may be challenging, as some methods can rely on siloed tools or subjective manual reviews that may lead to inefficient re-validation or compliance risks. A system may utilize a heterogeneous graph model to create a unified digital representation of a validated system, which can integrate entities such as code, data, infrastructure, and regulatory requirements. For example, when a change is proposed, a change propagation simulator can analyze potential effects by performing a weighted traversal of the graph to determine a multi-dimensional impact radius and a corresponding risk vector. Based on this analysis, a targeted and risk-based validation plan may be generated to provide a data-driven method for managing change control and supporting the maintenance of system compliance. View details Autonomous Causal Inference Using Artificial Intelligence Agents Teginder Singh RK Neelakandan Bakul Patel Justin Chen Kiran Dattani Sean Hamill Jake Van Bochove Technical Disclosure Commons (2025) Preview Preview abstract Post-market drug-safety procedures, known as pharmacovigilance, require a team of skilled physicians or epidemiologists to manually investigate each adverse event. This disclosure describes artificial intelligence (AI) agent-based, cloud computing techniques that automate the end-to-end cognitive workflow of investigating potential adverse drug events (ADEs). Moving beyond current techniques, which only perform statistical signal detection, the described techniques enable the determination of biological causality. Upon receiving a statistical signal of an adverse event, plausible biological hypotheses that can explain the signal are autonomously generated. A set of specialized software agents are dispatched to forage for evidence across disparate data sources (real-world evidence platforms, scientific literature, genomic databases, etc.). The results generated by the agents are synthesized into findings that score the likelihood of a causal link. The final output is a detailed, auditable causality dossier that enables human safety experts to make faster, better-informed decisions. View details Proactive and Semi-autonomous Agentic Quality Management Framework RK Neelakandan Teginder Singh Bakul Patel Technical Disclosure Commons (2025) Preview Preview abstract Traditionally, quality management relies on siloed systems of record such as quality management system (QMS), application lifecycle management (ALM), and manufacturing execution system (MES) platforms. These systems are often static, passive repositories that require significant manual effort to connect disparate data and derive actionable insights. Fragmentation and lack of proactive intelligence can lead to delays in identifying quality issues, ensuring compliance, and accelerating innovation. This disclosure describes a quality management framework to provide collaboration between human experts and specialized artificial intelligence (AI) agents for proactive and semi-autonomous quality management. The framework provides a distributed, intelligent ecosystem where a central AI engine can delegate specific, complex quality workflows to specialized AI agents that operate continually and autonomously, with a human-in-the-loop for final approval. The framework is built on a three-layer architecture that can be powered by a cloud computing platform. View details Zero-Shot Image Moderation in Google Ads with LLM-Assisted Textual Descriptions and Cross-modal Co-embeddings Wei Qiao Jimin Li Eric Xiao Katie Warren Enming Luo Krishna Viswanathan Ariel Fuxman Yuan Wang Bill Li Yintao Liu (2025) Preview Preview abstract We present a scalable and agile approach for ads image content moderation at Google, addressing the challenges of moderating massive volumes of ads with diverse content and evolving policies. The proposed method utilizes human-curated textual descriptions and cross-modal text-image co-embeddings to enable zero-shot classification of policy violating ads images, bypassing the need for extensive supervised training data and human labeling. By leveraging large language models (LLMs) and user expertise, the system generates and refines a comprehensive set of textual descriptions representing policy guidelines. During inference, co-embedding similarity between incoming images and the textual descriptions serves as a reliable signal for policy violation detection, enabling efficient and adaptable ads content moderation. Evaluation results demonstrate the efficacy of this framework in significantly boosting the detection of policy violating content. View details System for Generating Auditable Product Definitions with an Adaptive Conversational Agent Bakul Patel Teginder Singh RK Neelakandan Technical Disclosure Commons (2025) Preview Preview abstract Defining products for regulated industries may be challenging, as some tools, such as passive document editors, static forms, and general-purpose conversational agents, can lack adaptive, domain-specific guidance and may be unable to produce auditable records. Systems and methods are described that can assist with these challenges using a conversational artificial intelligence system. The system can employ a large language model and a dynamic questioning engine to interpret a user's natural language responses. By referencing a configurable knowledge base of domain-specific information, for example regulatory frameworks, the engine can adaptively adjust its line of questioning. From the elicited information, the system can concurrently generate formal product definition documents and a corresponding auditable interaction log. This process can provide a structured, interactive method for developing product definitions while creating a verifiable record to support internal governance and regulatory compliance. View details Model-Driven Continuous Validation Using Adversarial Testing in a Digital Twin RK Neelakandan Teginder Singh Bakul Patel Technical Disclosure Commons (2025) Preview Preview abstract Conventional software validation methods can be static and periodic, which may present challenges for continuously updated platforms (e.g., cloud platforms) in regulated industries and can impede the validation of non-deterministic systems like artificial intelligence models. A system for continuous validation may use a dual-pathway architecture guided by a machine-readable compliance model. One pathway can perform adversarial testing within an isolated digital twin of a production application to discover potential compliance weaknesses. Concurrently, a second pathway can provide real-time observational monitoring of the live production system for policy deviations and anomalies. Findings from both pathways may be consolidated into a persistent, verifiable evidence record, which can provide an ongoing assurance function to help maintain a system's validated state and mitigate compliance risks in dynamic environments. View details 41 42 43 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
