 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 121 - 135 of 676 publications chip template Remove Leveraging Per-Example Privacy for Machine Unlearning Nazanin Mohammadi Sepahvand Anvith Thudi Berivan Isik Ashmita Bhattacharyya Nicolas Papernot Eleni Triantafillou Daniel M. Roy Karolina Dziugaite International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) (2025) Preview Preview abstract This work focuses on developing fine-grained theoretical insights to quantify unlearning difficulty at the level of individual data points for fine-tuning-based unlearning. Unlike other unlearning methods that lack theoretical guarantees for non-convex models, our approach builds on recent advances in differential privacy to provide per-instance guarantees using Rényi divergence. While our theoretical analysis applies to Langevin dynamics, we empirically demonstrate that the derived guarantees—and their trends—continue to hold for fine-tuning, even in the absence of explicit noise. Our results show that per-instance privacy levels computed from training dynamics reliably predict unlearning difficulty, offering a principled and practical way to assess unlearning performance. Furthermore, our method identifies harder-to-unlearn data more effectively than existing heuristics, providing a more precise tool for guiding unlearning strategies. These findings pave the way for adaptive and efficient unlearning methods tailored to the properties of specific data points. View details GeoChain: Multimodal Chain-of-Thought for Geographic Reasoning Sahiti Yerramilli Nilay Pande Rynaa Grover Jayant Tamarapalli Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2025, Association for Computational Linguistics, Suzhou, China, pp. 23624-23639 Preview Preview abstract This paper introduces GeoChain, a large-scale benchmark for evaluating step-by-step geographic reasoning in multimodal large language models (MLLMs). Leveraging 1.46 million Mapillary street-level images, GeoChain pairs each image with a 21-step chain-of-thought (CoT) question sequence (over 30 million Q&A pairs). These sequences guide models from coarse attributes to fine-grained localization across four reasoning categories - visual, spatial, cultural, and precise geolocation - annotated by difficulty. Images are also enriched with semantic segmentation (150 classes) and a visual locatability score. Our benchmarking of contemporary MLLMs (GPT-4.1 variants, Claude 3.7, Gemini 2.5 variants) on a diverse 2,088-image subset reveals consistent challenges: models frequently exhibit weaknesses in visual grounding, display erratic reasoning, and struggle to achieve accurate localization, especially as the reasoning complexity escalates. GeoChain offers a robust diagnostic methodology, critical for fostering significant advancements in complex geographic reasoning within MLLMs. View details A Call to Action: Advancing the Conversation Around Neurodivergent Education-Employment Transitions Dannie Lynn Fountain Vicki Baker Kevin Danley Closing the Gap (2025) Preview Preview abstract Neurodiversity is still largely stigmatized and excluded from DEIB frameworks and related organizational initiatives, despite the increased recognition regarding the benefits of neuroinclusion within the education and corporate spheres. We seek to address this knowledge-to-practice gap through the creation of the Neurodiversity Engagement Framework. By highlighting supports needed for neurodivergent individuals, and those that support them, the framework helps neurodivergent individuals navigate within and across higher education and industry contexts. Informed by an interdisciplinary review of literature from higher education, industry, and corporate leadership contexts, the Neurodiversity Engagement Framework brings to light prevailing challenges within practices and policies, serving as a guide for the creation of a more supportive foundation for neurodiverse individuals to thrive. In this manuscript, readers are encouraged to consider the myriad of impacts that neurodiversity has on higher education and industry experiences and the ways that organizations can be more proactive in their support of this growing population. To conclude, we offer a roadmap for future research and practice to further elucidate ways academic and corporation leaders and policymakers can effectively support neurodivergent individuals. View details HueManity: Probing Fine-Grained Visual Perception in MLLMs Rynaa Grover Jayant Tamarapalli Sahiti Yerramilli Nilay Pande arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.03194 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) excel at high-level visual reasoning, but their performance on nuanced perceptual tasks remains surprisingly limited. We present HueManity, a benchmark designed to assess visual perception in MLLMs. The dataset comprises 83,850 images featuring two-character alphanumeric strings embedded in Ishihara test style dot patterns, challenging models on precise pattern recognition. Our evaluation of nine state-of-the-art MLLMs on HueManity demonstrates a significant performance deficit compared to human and traditional computer vision baselines. The best-performing MLLM achieved a 33.6% accuracy on the numeric "easy" task and a striking 3% on the alphanumeric "hard" task. In contrast, human participants achieved near-perfect scores (100% and 95.6%), and a fine-tuned ResNet50 model reached accuracies of 96.5% and 94.5%. These results highlight a critical gap in the visual capabilities of current MLLMs. Our analysis further explores potential architectural and training-paradigm factors contributing to this perceptual gap in MLLMs. We will open-source HueManity dataset and code to foster further research in improving perceptual robustness of MLLMs. View details Is Long Context All You Need? Leveraging LLM's Extended Context for NL2SQL Yeounoh Chung Brenton Milne Gaurav Tarlok Kakkar Yu Gan Fatma Ozcan PVLDB (2025), pp. 2735-2747 Preview Preview abstract Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive capabilities across a range of natural language processing tasks. In particular, improvements in reasoning abilities and the expansion of context windows have opened new avenues for leveraging these powerful models. NL2SQL is challenging in that the natural language question is inherently ambiguous, while the SQL generation requires a precise understanding of complex data schema and semantics. One approach to this semantic ambiguous problem is to provide more and sufficient contextual information. In this work, we explore the performance and the latency trade-offs of the extended context window (a.k.a., long context) offered by Google's state-of-the-art LLM (\textit{gemini-1.5-pro}). We study the impact of various contextual information, including column example values, question and SQL query pairs, user-provided hints, SQL documentation, and schema. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first work to study how the extended context window and extra contextual information can help NL2SQL generation with respect to both accuracy and latency cost. We show that long context LLMs are robust and do not get lost in the extended contextual information. Additionally, our long-context NL2SQL pipeline based on Google's \textit{gemini-pro-1.5} achieve a strong performance with 67.41\% on BIRD benchmark (dev) without finetuning and expensive self-consistency based techniques. View details Validation of Quantum Elliptic Curve Point Addition Circuits Frankie Papa (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Specific quantum algorithms exist to—in theory— break elliptic curve cryptographic protocols. Implementing these algorithms requires designing quantum circuits that perform elliptic curve arithmetic. To accurately judge a cryptographic protocol’s resistance against future quantum computers, researchers figure out minimal resource-count circuits for performing these operations while still being correct. To assure the correctness of a circuit, it is integral to restore all ancilla qubits used to their original states. Failure to do so could result in decoherence of the computation’s final result. Through rigorous classical simulation and unit testing, I surfaced four inconsistencies in the state-ofthe-art quantum circuit for elliptic curve point addition where the circuit diagram states the qubits are returned in the original (|0⟩) state, but the intermediate values are not uncomputed. I provide fixes to the circuit without increasing the leading-order gate cost. View details Learning by solving differential equations Benoit Dherin Michael Munn Hanna Mazzawi Michael Wunder Sourabh Medapati Xavi Gonzalvo 2025 Preview Preview abstract Modern deep learning algorithms use variations of gradient descent as their main learning methods. Gradient descent can be understood as the simplest Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) solver; namely, the Euler method applied to the gradient flow differential equation. Since Euler, many ODE solvers have been devised that follow the gradient flow equation more precisely and more stably. Runge-Kutta (RK) methods provide a family of very powerful explicit and implicit high-order ODE solvers. However, these higher-order solvers have not found wide application in deep learning so far. In this work, we evaluate the performance of higher-order RK solvers when applied in deep learning, study their limitations, and propose ways to overcome these drawbacks. In particular, we explore how to improve their performance by naturally incorporating key ingredients of modern neural network optimizers such as preconditioning, adaptive learning rates, and momentum. View details Matryoshka Model Learning for Improved Elastic Student Models Chetan Verma Aditya Srinivas Timmaraju Cho-Jui Hsieh Suyash Damle Ngot Bui Yang Zhang Wen Chen Xin Liu Prateek Jain Inderjit Dhillon 2025 Preview Preview abstract Industry-grade ML models are carefully designed to meet rapidly evolving serving constraints, which requires significant resources for model development. In this paper, we propose MatTA, a framework for training multiple accurate Student models using a novel Teacher-TA-Student recipe. TA models are larger versions of the Student models with higher capacity, and thus allow Student models to better relate to the Teacher model and also bring in more domain-specific expertise. Furthermore, multiple accurate Student models can be extracted from the TA model. Therefore, despite only one training run, our methodology provides multiple servable options to trade off accuracy for lower serving cost. We demonstrate the proposed method, MatTA, on proprietary datasets and models. Its practical efficacy is underscored by live A/B tests within a production ML system, demonstrating 20% improvement on a key metric. We also demonstrate our method on GPT-2 Medium, a public model, and achieve relative improvements of over 24% on SAT Math and over 10% on the LAMBADA benchmark. View details Visualizing Dynamics of Charges and Strings in (2+1)D Lattice Gauge Theories Tyler Cochran Bernhard Jobst Eliott Rosenberg Yuri Lensky Gaurav Gyawali Norhan Eassa Melissa Will Aaron Szasz Dmitry Abanin Rajeev Acharya Laleh Beni Trond Andersen Markus Ansmann Frank Arute Kunal Arya Abe Asfaw Juan Atalaya Ryan Babbush Brian Ballard Joe Bardin Andreas Bengtsson Alex Bilmes Alexandre Bourassa Jenna Bovaird Michael Broughton David Browne Brett Buchea Bob Buckley Tim Burger Brian Burkett Nicholas Bushnell Anthony Cabrera Juan Campero Hung-Shen Chang Jimmy Chen Benjamin Chiaro Jahan Claes Agnetta Cleland Josh Cogan Roberto Collins Paul Conner William Courtney Alex Crook Ben Curtin Sayan Das Sean Demura Laura De Lorenzo Agustin Di Paolo Paul Donohoe ILYA Drozdov Andrew Dunsworth Alec Eickbusch Aviv Elbag Mahmoud Elzouka Catherine Erickson Vinicius Ferreira Leslie Flores Ebrahim Forati Austin Fowler Brooks Foxen Suhas Ganjam Robert Gasca Élie Genois William Giang Dar Gilboa Raja Gosula Alejo Grajales Dau Dietrich Graumann Alex Greene Jonathan Gross Steve Habegger Monica Hansen Matt Harrigan Sean Harrington Paula Heu Oscar Higgott Jeremy Hilton Robert Huang Ashley Huff Bill Huggins Evan Jeffrey Zhang Jiang Cody Jones Chaitali Joshi Pavol Juhas Dvir Kafri Hui Kang Amir Karamlou Kostyantyn Kechedzhi Trupti Khaire Tanuj Khattar Mostafa Khezri Seon Kim Paul Klimov Bryce Kobrin Alexander Korotkov Fedor Kostritsa John Mark Kreikebaum Vlad Kurilovich Dave Landhuis Tiano Lange-Dei Brandon Langley Kim Ming Lau Justin Ledford Kenny Lee Brian Lester Loick Le Guevel Wing Li Alexander Lill Will Livingston Aditya Locharla Daniel Lundahl Aaron Lunt Sid Madhuk Ashley Maloney Salvatore Mandra Leigh Martin Orion Martin Cameron Maxfield Jarrod McClean Matt McEwen Seneca Meeks Anthony Megrant Kevin Miao Reza Molavi Sebastian Molina Shirin Montazeri Ramis Movassagh Charles Neill Michael Newman Anthony Nguyen Murray Ich Nguyen Chia Ni Kris Ottosson Alex Pizzuto Rebecca Potter Orion Pritchard Chris Quintana Ganesh Ramachandran Matt Reagor David Rhodes Gabrielle Roberts Kannan Sankaragomathi Kevin Satzinger Henry Schurkus Mike Shearn Aaron Shorter Noah Shutty Vladimir Shvarts Vlad Sivak Spencer Small Clarke Smith Sofia Springer George Sterling Jordan Suchard Alex Sztein Doug Thor Mert Torunbalci Abeer Vaishnav Justin Vargas Sergey Vdovichev Guifre Vidal Catherine Vollgraff Heidweiller Steven Waltman Shannon Wang Brayden Ware Ted White Kristi Wong Bryan Woo Cheng Xing Jamie Yao Ping Yeh Bicheng Ying Juhwan Yoo Nour Yosri Grayson Young Adam Zalcman Yaxing Zhang Ningfeng Zhu Nicholas Zobrist Sergio Boixo Julian Kelly Erik Lucero Yu Chen Vadim Smelyanskiy Hartmut Neven Adam Gammon-Smith Frank Pollmann Michael Knap Pedram Roushan Nature, 642 (2025), 315–320 Preview Preview abstract Lattice gauge theories (LGTs) can be used to understand a wide range of phenomena, from elementary particle scattering in high-energy physics to effective descriptions of many-body interactions in materials. Studying dynamical properties of emergent phases can be challenging, as it requires solving many-body problems that are generally beyond perturbative limits. Here we investigate the dynamics of local excitations in a LGT using a two-dimensional lattice of superconducting qubits. We first construct a simple variational circuit that prepares low-energy states that have a large overlap with the ground state; then we create charge excitations with local gates and simulate their quantum dynamics by means of a discretized time evolution. As the electric field coupling constant is increased, our measurements show signatures of transitioning from deconfined to confined dynamics. For confined excitations, the electric field induces a tension in the string connecting them. Our method allows us to experimentally image string dynamics in a (2+1)D LGT, from which we uncover two distinct regimes inside the confining phase: for weak confinement, the string fluctuates strongly in the transverse direction, whereas for strong confinement, transverse fluctuations are effectively frozen. We also demonstrate a resonance condition at which dynamical string breaking is facilitated. Our LGT implementation on a quantum processor presents a new set of techniques for investigating emergent excitations and string dynamics. View details RemapRoute: Local Remapping of Internet Path Changes renata cruz teixeira Christophe Diot italo cunha Elverton Fazzion Darryl Veitch 2025 Preview Preview abstract Several systems rely on traceroute to track a large number of Internet paths as they change over time. Monitoring systems perform this task by remapping paths periodically or whenever a change is detected. This paper shows that such complete remapping is inefficient, because most path changes are localized to a few hops of a path. We develop RemapRoute, a tool to remap a path locally given the previously known path and a change point. RemapRoute sends targeted probes to locate and remap the often few hops that have changed. Our evaluation with trace-driven simulations and in a real deployment shows that local remapping reduces the average number of probes issued during remapping by 63% and 79%, respectively, when compared with complete remapping. At the same time, our results show that local remapping has little impact on the accuracy of inferred paths. View details The Case for Leveraging Transport Signals to Improve Internet Speed Test Efficiency Christophe Diot Phillipa Gill Cristina Leon Neal Cardwell Computer Communication Review (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Internet speed tests are an important tool to enable consumers and regulators to monitor the quality of Internet access. However, increased Internet speeds to the home and an increased demand for speed testing pose scaling challenges to providers of speed tests, who must maintain costly infrastructure to keep up with this demand. In recent years, this has led the popular NDT speed test to limit data transfer to a total of 250MB, which comes at the cost of accuracy for high bandwidth speed test clients. In this paper, we observe that the NDT speed test server’s congestion control algorithm (BBRv1) is also trying to estimate the capacity of the connection. We leverage this observation and signals from BBR to improve the accuracy and efficiency of speed tests. We first show how leveraging signals from BBR can more than double the accuracy of a 10MB test–from 17% to 43%–for clients with speeds over 400Mbps. We then show how using BBR signals to adaptively end the speed test reduces data transfer by 36% and increased accuracy by 13% for high bandwidth clients, relative to a 100MB fixed length test. Even accounting for clients that never observe enough samples to utilize the BBR signal, this adaptive approach still uses 25% less data than a fixed 100MB test with 37-44% higher accuracy. View details ZAPBench: A Benchmark for Whole-Brain Activity Prediction in Zebrafish Jan-Matthis Lueckmann Alexander Immer Alex Bo-Yuan Chen Peter H. Li Mariela D. Petkova Nirmala A. Iyer Luuk Willem Hesselink Aparna Dev Gudrun Ihrke Woohyun Park Alyson Petruncio Aubrey Weigel Wyatt Korff Florian Engert Jeff W. Lichtman Misha B. Ahrens Michał Januszewski Viren Jain International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Data-driven benchmarks have led to significant progress in key scientific modeling domains including weather and structural biology. Here, we present the Zebrafish Activity Prediction Benchmark (ZAPBench), which quantitatively measures progress on the problem of predicting cellular-resolution neural activity throughout an entire vertebrate brain. The benchmark is based on a novel dataset containing 4d light-sheet microscopy recordings of more than 70,000 neurons in a larval zebrafish brain, along with motion stabilized and voxel-level cell segmentations of these data that facilitate development of a variety of forecasting methods. Initial results from a selection of time series and volumetric video modeling approaches achieve better performance than naive baseline methods, but also show room for further improvement. The specific brain used in the activity recording is also undergoing synaptic-level anatomical mapping, which will enable future integration of detailed structural information into ZAP forecasting methods. View details Bridging Sign and Spoken Languages: Pseudo GlossGeneration for Sign Language Translation Peike Li Trevor Cohn Jianyuan Guo Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Sign Language Translation (SLT) aims to map sign language videos to spoken language text. A common approach leverages gloss annotations as an intermediate representation, decomposing SLT into two sub-tasks: video-to-gloss recognition and gloss-to-text translation. While effective, this paradigm relies on expert-annotated gloss labels, which are costly and increasingly unavailable in many datasets, limiting scalability. To address this challenge, we propose a gloss-free pseudo gloss generation framework that eliminates the need for human-annotated glosses while preserving the structured intermediate representation. Specifically, we prompt a Large Language Model (LLM) with example text-gloss pairs to extract potential sign-related gloss words from the text by leveraging its in-context learning capability. To mitigate the inherent misalignment between generated pseudo glosses and sign sequences in the video, we further refine their order by formulating the alignment as a weakly supervised learning problem. With the reordered pseudo-glosses, additional alignment losses such as CTC can be incorporated to enhance supervision. We train our SLT model—comprising a vision encoder and a translator—under a three-stage pipeline, effectively bridging the gap between sign and spoken language. Despite its simplicity, our approach outperforms previous state-of-the-art gloss-free frameworks across three SLT benchmarks and achieves competitive results with gloss-based methods. View details Preventing Network Bottlenecks: Accelerating Datacenter Services with Hotspot-Aware Placement for Compute and Storage Hamid Bazzaz Yingjie Bi Weiwu Pang Minlan Yu Ramesh Govindan Neal Cardwell Nandita Dukkipati Chloe Tsai Chris DeForeest Yuxue Jin Charlie Carver Jan Kopański Liqun (Legion) Cheng Amin Vahdat 2025 Preview Preview abstract Datacenter network hotspots, defined as links with persistently high utilization, can lead to performance bottlenecks.In this work, we study hotspots in Google’s datacenter networks. We find that these hotspots occur most frequently at ToR switches and can persist for hours. They are caused mainly by bandwidth demand-supply imbalance, largely due to high demand from network-intensive services, or demand exceeding available bandwidth when compute/storage upgrades outpace ToR bandwidth upgrades. Compounding this issue is bandwidth-independent task/data placement by data-center compute and storage schedulers. We quantify the performance impact of hotspots, and find that they can degrade the end-to-end latency of some distributed applications by over 2× relative to low utilization levels. Finally, we describe simple improvements we deployed. In our cluster scheduler, adding hotspot-aware task placement reduced the number of hot ToRs by 90%; in our distributed file system, adding hotspot-aware data placement reduced p95 network latency by more than 50%. While congestion control, load balancing, and traffic engineering can efficiently utilize paths for a fixed placement, we find hotspot-aware placement – placing tasks and data under ToRs with higher available bandwidth – is crucial for achieving consistently good performance. View details The Cost of Consistency: Submodular Maximization with Constant Recourse Paul Duetting Federico Fusco Silvio Lattanzi Ashkan Norouzi Fard Ola Svensson Morteza Zadimoghaddam Proceedings of the 57th Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (2025), 1406–1417 Preview Preview abstract In this work, we study online submodular maximization and how the requirement of maintaining a stable solution impacts the approximation. In particular, we seek bounds on the best-possible approximation ratio that is attainable when the algorithm is allowed to make, at most, a constant number of updates per step. We show a tight information-theoretic bound of $2/3$ for general monotone submodular functions and an improved (also tight) bound of $3/4$ for coverage functions. Since both these bounds are attained by non poly-time algorithms, we also give a poly-time randomized algorithm that achieves a $0.51$-approximation. Combined with an information-theoretic hardness of $1/2$ for deterministic algorithms from prior work, our work thus shows a separation between deterministic and randomized algorithms, both information theoretically and for poly-time algorithms. View details 9 10 11 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
