 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 616 - 630 of 676 publications chip template Remove Google Ads Content Moderation with RAG Jimin Li Eric Xiao Yi-ting Chen Wei Qiao Enming Luo Megan Oftelie Yuan Wang Tiantian Fang Bill Li Zhimin Wang Zhongli Ding Yintao Liu 2025 Preview Preview abstract Keeping ad content policy classifiers up to date while maintaining the high quality bar is a significant challenge, especially with new threats emerging constantly. This paper introduces a new application to apply RAG-inspired in-context learning to accelerate content policy enforcement, especially when mitigating new emerging violations. Our application leverages RAG-based LLM inference for classification tasks and incorporates augmented reasoning information for better performance. We also developed a practical framework to enforce new violation patterns in O(1) days demonstrating improved memorization and generalization capabilities compared to traditional parametric and non-parametric models. View details Help-seeking and Coping Strategies for Technology-facilitated Abuse Experienced by Youth Diana Freed Sunny Consolvo Dan Cosley Patrick Gage Kelley Ender Ricart Kurt Thomas Natalie Bazarova 2025 Preview Preview abstract Technology provides youth (ages 10–17) with near-constant opportunities for learning, communication, and self-expression. It can also expose them to technology-facilitated abuse: harassment, coercion, fraud, and more. The ability of youth to navigate such abuse is crucial for their well-being and development. A recent advisory by the U.S. Surgeon General called for better support of youth, including that youth should “reach out for help.” However, little is known about how youth seek help or otherwise cope with technology-facilitated abuse. Through a qualitative study in the U.S., we examine how youth engage in self-reliance, seek help from others, and how others seek help on a youth’s behalf. We discuss these strategies and outline opportunities for how the HCI community can better support youth who experience technology-facilitated abuse. View details PROTECT: A Framework to Foster Digital Resilience for Youth Navigating Technology-Facilitated Abuse Diana Freed Natalie Bazarova Sunny Consolvo Dan Cosley Patrick Gage Kelley Social Sciences (2025) Preview Preview abstract Youth are increasingly exposed to a broad range of technology-facilitated abuse that challenges their safety and well-being. Building on previous work that examined youth help-seeking behaviors, coping strategies, threats they encounter, and the social support systems around them, we articulate a framework— called PROTECT—Problem recognition, Reaching out, Organizing support, Training, Engaging experts, Continuous support, and Tackling safety measures—which integrates existing models of support, help-seeking, and digital skills to offer a high-level, structured approach to adults who serve as a support system to youth navigate technology-facilitated abuse. The framework unpacks social and contextual dynamics that influence help-seeking behaviors, providing a foundation for educators, advocates, health professionals, developers and other adult stakeholders to design and develop trauma-informed, timely interventions to promote resilience. View details ASAP: an Agentic Solution to Auto-optimize Performance of Large-Scale LLM Training Yuran Ding Xinwei Chen Xiaofan Zhang Zongwei Zhou 2025 Preview Preview abstract Optimizing large language model (LLM) training on dritibuted domain-specific accelerator systems presents significant challenges due to its complex optimization space and reliance on manual processes, resulting in slow development and underutilize resources. Existing optimization methods, however, rely on time-consuming manual tuning or resource-intensive black-box searches, which struggle to keep pace with the rapidly evolving LLM domain. To address this, we introduce the ASAP, an Agentic Solution to Auto-optimize Performance of Large-Scale LLM Training. It is a multi-agent system, featuring Coordinator, Analyzer, and Proposal agents, which integrates LLM reasoning with insights from performance profiling tools, analytical roofline models, and a knowledge base of best practices and successful past optimizations. Our proposed design can automate the diagnosis of performance bottlenecks and intelligently generates optimized sharding configurations with reasoning, and effectively improve the distributed LLM training efficiency. This approach promises to significantly reduce manual effort, shorten iteration cycles, and enhance accelerator utilization, offering a scalable and explanable methodology for AI-assisted performance engineering in large-scale machine learning. View details Private Hyperparameter Tuning with Ex-Post Guarantee Badih Ghazi Pritish Kamath Alexander Knop Ravi Kumar Pasin Manurangsi Chiyuan Zhang NeurIPS (2025) Preview Preview abstract The conventional approach in differential privacy (DP) literature formulates the privacy-utility tradeoff with a "privacy-first" perspective: for a predetermined level of privacy, a certain utility is achievable. However, practitioners often operate under a "utility-first" paradigm, prioritizing a desired level of utility and then determining the corresponding privacy cost. Wu et al. [2019] initiated a formal study of this ``utility-first'' perspective by introducing ex-post DP. They demonstrated that by adding correlated Laplace noise and progressively reducing it on demand, a sequence of increasingly accurate estimates of a private parameter can be generated, with the privacy cost attributed only to the least noisy iterate released. This led to a Laplace mechanism variant that achieves a specified utility with minimal privacy loss. However, their work, and similar findings by Whitehouse et al. [2023], are primarily limited to simple mechanisms based on Laplace or Gaussian noise. In this paper, we significantly generalize these results. In particular, we extend the findings of Wu et al. [2019] and Liu and Talwar [2019] to support any sequence of private estimators, incurring at most a doubling of the original privacy budget. Furthermore, we demonstrate that hyperparameter tuning for these estimators, including the selection of an optimal privacy budget, can be performed without additional privacy cost. Finally, we extend our results to ex-post R'{e}nyi DP, further broadening the applicability of utility-first privacy mechanisms. View details PREM: Privately Answering Statistical Queries with Relative Error Pasin Manurangsi Sushant Sachdeva Badih Ghazi Cristóbal Guzmán Alexander Knop Pritish Kamath Ravi Kumar COLT (2025) Preview Preview abstract We introduce PREM (Private Relative Error Multiplicative weight update) a new (ε, δ)-DP mechanism for privately generating synthetic data that achieves a relative error guarantee for linear queries. Namely, for a domain X, a family F of queries f : X → {0, 1}, and ζ > 0, the mechanism on input dataset D ∈ X^n outputs a synthetic dataset D ̃ ∈ X^n such that all linear queries in F on D, namely sum_x∈D f(x) for f ∈ F, are within a 1 ± ζ multiplicative factor of the corresponding value on D ̃ up to an additive error that is polynomial in log |F|, log |X |, log n, log(1/δ), 1/ε, and 1/ζ. This is in contrast to the standard additive-error only setting considered in the literature, which is known to require polynomial error in at least one of n, |F|, or |X |. We complement the algorithm with nearly matching lower bounds. View details RFC 9904 - DNSSEC Cryptographic Algorithm Recommendation Update Process Warren Kumari Wes Hardaker RFC Editor (2025) Preview Preview abstract The DNSSEC protocol makes use of various cryptographic algorithms to provide authentication of DNS data and proof of nonexistence. To ensure interoperability between DNS resolvers and DNS authoritative servers, it is necessary to specify both a set of algorithm implementation requirements and usage guidelines to ensure that there is at least one algorithm that all implementations support. This document replaces and obsoletes RFC 8624 and moves the canonical source of algorithm implementation requirements and usage guidance for DNSSEC from RFC 8624 to the IANA DNSSEC algorithm registries. This is done to allow the list of requirements to be more easily updated and referenced. Extensions to these registries can be made in future RFCs. This document also updates RFC 9157 and incorporates the revised IANA DNSSEC considerations from that RFC. View details SAC127 - DNS Blocking Revisited Warren Kumari Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN), ICANN Security and Stability Advisory Committee (SSAC) Reports and Advisories (2025), pp. 42 Preview Preview abstract The Domain Name System (DNS) translates human-readable domain names to Internet Protocol (IP) addresses that are used by computers to communicate with each other on the Internet. DNS blocking is a method for restricting access to information or services on the Internet by interfering with the normal process of responding to DNS queries about domain names or IP addresses. This is done either by denying that a name or address exists or by providing false information about it. Blocking is one of several approaches to restricting or regulating access to Internet information. Often, DNS blocking is employed because it is relatively easy to implement, but it has limitations and potential side effects. This report focuses on the technical means by which DNS blocking can be accomplished, and the effects—both intended and unintended—of its use in different contexts. The aim of this report is to advise the Internet community, and especially policymakers and government officials, of the implications and consequences of using DNS blocking to control access to resources on the Internet. DNS blocking can be accomplished by changing the behavior of a DNS server so that it responds in a way that is different from normal, e.g. as was intended by the administrator of the domain name. When an end user wishes to connect to a web site or other service, a recursive resolver translates the domain name of that site or service into an IP address. DNS blocking via recursive resolvers modifies or blocks this translation. DNS blocking is effective only to the extent that users rely on the DNS infrastructure where the blocking is implemented. Blocking can be bypassed by various methods, such as using an alternative DNS resolver to avoid a resolver where a block has been implemented or using a Virtual Private Network (VPN). The effectiveness of DNS blocking is often a matter of degree. It is crucial to understand that DNS blocking does not remove or alter the underlying content - it merely attempts to prevent access through the most common and convenient pathway. The content itself typically remains available at the original IP address or through alternative domain names or protocols, meaning that determined users can still reach it using other means. DNS blocking can have serious side effects. A block may affect users outside the jurisdiction of the party doing the blocking. Users may not know that a block is in place, and can interpret it as a site outage or other error, encouraging potentially insecure behavior to "fix" it. A block may affect domains that provide services for other domains, causing collateral damage beyond the intended scope of the block. Governments use DNS blocking for complex purposes, and these can be controversial. One motivation is public safety, such as blocking domains that a government decides enable illegal activities or incite violence. Some governments use DNS blocking as a tool for censorship. The SSAC notes that whether an action constitutes censorship, or the legality of any specific case of DNS blocking, will depend upon local laws (which vary widely across the globe), and can involve personal convictions, about which people may vary in good faith. For these reasons, the SSAC does not make statements in this report about the propriety of specific cases of DNS blocking–such discussions are more suited for political fora. The merits or advisability of governmental or other attempts to control access to resources on the Internet are beyond the scope of this report. View details RFC 9905 - Deprecating the Use of SHA-1 in DNSSEC Signature Algorithms Warren Kumari Wes Hardaker RFC Editor (2025) Preview Preview abstract This document deprecates the use of the RSASHA1 and RSASHA1-NSEC3-SHA1 algorithms for the creation of DNS Public Key (DNSKEY) and Resource Record Signature (RRSIG) records. It updates RFCs 4034 and 5155 as it deprecates the use of these algorithms. View details RFC 9906 - Deprecate Usage of ECC-GOST within DNSSEC Warren Kumari Wes Hardaker RFC Editor (2025) Preview Preview abstract This document retires the use of GOST R 34.10-2001 (mnemonic "ECC- GOST") and GOST R 34.11-94 within DNSSEC. RFC 5933 (Historic) defined the use of GOST R 34.10-2001 and GOST R 34.11-94 algorithms with DNS Security Extensions (DNSSEC). This document updates RFC 5933 by deprecating the use of ECC-GOST. View details Data-Centric Improvements for Enhancing Multi-Modal Understanding in Conversational Speech Processing Sercan Arik Ruoxi Sun Max Chen Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Conversational assistants are increasingly popular across diverse real-world applications, highlighting the need for advanced multimodal speech modeling. Speech, as a natural mode of communication, encodes rich user-specific characteristics such as speaking rate and pitch, making it critical for effective interaction. Our work introduces a data-centric customization approach for efficiently enhancing multimodal understanding in conversational speech modeling. Central to our contributions is a novel multi-task learning paradigm that involves designing auxiliary tasks to utilize a small amount of speech data. Our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance on the Spoken-SQuAD benchmark, using only 10% of the training data with open-weight models, establishing a robust and efficient framework for audio-centric conversational modeling. We also introduce ASK-QA, the first dataset for multi-turn spoken dialogue with ambiguous user requests and dynamic evaluation inputs. View details Preference Adaptive and Sequential Text-to-Image Generation Ofir Nabati Guy Tennenholtz Chih-wei Hsu Moonkyung Ryu Deepak Ramachandran Yinlam Chow Sean Li Craig Boutilier 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-25), Vancouver (2025), pp. 45362-45394 Preview Preview abstract We consider the problem of sequential text-to-image generation. Specifically, we formulate a personalized interactive framework, where an agent iteratively improves a user's prompt through a series of sequential prompt expansions. We formulate the problem as a sequential decision-making task. Using human raters, we create a dataset of sequential preferences for this problem. We then leverage our sequential data, together with large-scale open-source non-sequential datasets to construct user-preference and user-choice models. Particularly, we employ an EM strategy to develop a personalized sequential user model. We then leverage a multi-modal large language model (MM-LLM) and a value-based reinforcement learning (RL) agent to suggest a personalized and diverse slate of prompt expansions to the user. Our Personalized And Sequential Text-to-image Agent (PASTA) empowers diffusion models with personalized multi-turn capabilities, fostering collaborative co-creation, and addressing uncertainties or under-specifications in user intent. We evaluate our agent using human raters, showing significant improvement compared to baseline methods. We also release our sequential rater dataset and additional simulated data of user-agent interactions to advance future research in personalized multi-turn text-to-image generation. View details Asking Clarifying Questions for Preference Elicitation with Large Language Models Ali Montazer Guy Tennenholtz Craig Boutilier Ofer Meshi 1st Workshop on Next Generation of IR and Recommender Systems with Language Agents, Generative Models, and Conversational AI (GENNEXT@SIGIR'25), Padua, IT (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large Language Models (LLMs) have made it possible for recommendation systems to interact with users in open-ended conversational interfaces. In order to personalize LLM responses, it is crucial to elicit user preferences, especially when there is limited user history. One way to get more information is to present clarifying questions to the user. However, generating effective sequential clarifying questions across various domains remains a challenge, as even advanced LLMs still struggle with this task. To address this, we introduce a novel approach for training LLMs to ask sequential questions that reveal user preferences. Our method follows a two-stage process inspired by diffusion models: starting from a user profile, in a forward process we generate clarifying questions, obtain answers, and then remove the corresponding information from the user profile, which is analogous to adding noise to the user profile. In the reverse process, zour model learns to “denoise” the user profile by learning to ask effective clarifying questions. Our results show that our method significantly boosts the LLM’s proficiency in asking funnel questions and elicit user preferences effectively. View details Retrieval Quality at Context Limit Max McKinnon 2025 Preview Preview abstract The ability of large language models (LLMs) to recall and retrieve information from long contexts is critical for many real-world applications. Prior work (Liu et al., 2023) reported that LLMs suffer significant drops in retrieval accuracy for facts placed in the middle of large contexts, an effect known as "Lost in the Middle" (LITM). We find the model Gemini 2.5 Flash can answer needle-in-a-haystack questions with great accuracy regardless of document position including when the document is nearly at the input context limit. Our results suggest that the "Lost in the Middle" effect is not present for simple factoid Q&A in Gemini 2.5 Flash, indicating substantial improvements in long-context retrieval. View details Bone Conducted Signal Guided Speech Enhancement For Voice Assistant on Earbuds Jens Heitkaemper Joe Caroselli Max McKinnon Arun Narayanan Nathan Howard ICASSP 2025 - 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), IEEE Preview Preview abstract In this work we present a multi-modal, streaming enhancement net-work to improve speech recognition for voice assistants. The pro-posed model is guided by the bone conducted signal (BCS) to sep-arate the interfering sources from the target speaker signal. Wet trained the model on a simulated speech enhancement training set with a simulated BCS and finetune it on a small earbuds specific training set, consisting of less than 7 hours of speech. To account for distorted BCS the enhancement module is complemented by a voice activity-based decision to discard the enhanced output for BCS without speech information. A possibility to preprocess the BCS to account for the low-pass characteristic of the bone conduction is evaluated to lower the required transmission bandwidth from the ear-buds to the recognition device. The results show that a reduction of the BCS bandwidth can be reduced to 500 Hz with only a small losses in word error rate (WER). The system with and without bandwidth reduction are compared to a state-of-the-art multi-channel enhancement method on a realistic test set and outperforms the multi-channel model for most of the considered sets View details 42 43 44 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
