 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 136 - 150 of 676 publications chip template Remove PROTECT: A Framework to Foster Digital Resilience for Youth Navigating Technology-Facilitated Abuse Diana Freed Natalie Bazarova Sunny Consolvo Dan Cosley Patrick Gage Kelley Social Sciences Journal, 14(6) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Youth are increasingly exposed to a broad range of technology-facilitated abuse that challenges their safety and well-being. Building on previous work that examined youth help-seeking behaviors, coping strategies, threats they encounter, and the social support systems around them, we articulate a framework— called PROTECT—Problem recognition, Reaching out, Organizing support, Training, Engaging experts, Continuous support, and Tackling safety measures—which integrates existing models of support, help-seeking, and digital skills to offer a high-level, structured approach to adults who serve as a support system to youth navigate technology-facilitated abuse. The framework unpacks social and contextual dynamics that influence help-seeking behaviors, providing a foundation for educators, advocates, health professionals, developers and other adult stakeholders to design and develop trauma-informed, timely interventions to promote resilience. View details Seamful AI for Creative Software Engineering Sarah Inman Ambar Murillo Sarah D'Angelo Adam Brown Collin Green IEEE Software (2025) Preview Preview abstract Creativity in software development is frequently overlooked, specifically in the design of developer tools which often focus on productivity. This is likely because creativity is not always seen as a goal in software engineering; in part, this can be explained by the unique way in which software engineers relate to creativity as centered around reusability rather than novelty. However, creativity is a critical aspect of software engineering, and importantly, there is a clear possibility for AI to impact creativity in both positive or negative ways. In this article, we explore the differences in goals for designing AI tools for productivity compared to creativity and propose strategies to elevate creativity in the software engineering workflow. Specifically, we apply seamful design to AI powered software development to consider the role of seamfulness in software development workflows as a way to support creativity. View details Supporting the Digital Safety of At-Risk Users: Lessons Learned from 9+ Years of Research and Training Tara Matthews Elie Bursztein Patrick Gage Kelley Lea Kissner Andreas Kramm Andrew Oplinger Andy Schou Manya Sleeper Stephan Somogyi Dalila Szostak Kurt Thomas Anna Turner Jill Woelfer Lawrence You Izzie Zahorian Sunny Consolvo ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 32(3) (2025), pp. 1-39 Preview Preview abstract Creating information technologies intended for broad use that allow everyone to participate safely online—which we refer to as inclusive digital safety—requires understanding and addressing the digital-safety needs of a diverse range of users who face elevated risk of technology-facilitated attacks or disproportionate harm from such attacks—i.e., at-risk users. This article draws from more than 9 years of our work at Google to understand and support the digital safety of at-risk users—including survivors of intimate partner abuse, people involved with political campaigns, content creators, youth, and more—in technology intended for broad use. Among our learnings is that designing for inclusive digital safety across widely varied user needs and dynamic contexts is a wicked problem with no “correct” solution. Given this, we describe frameworks and design principles we have developed to help make at-risk research findings practically applicable to technologies intended for broad use and lessons we have learned about communicating them to practitioners. View details Beyond Digital Literacy: Building Youth Digital Resilience Through Existing “Information Sensibility” Practices Mia Hassoun Ian Beacock Todd Carmody Patrick Gage Kelley Beth Goldberg Devika Kumar Laura Murray Rebekah Park Behzad Sarmadi Sunny Consolvo Social Sciences Journal, 14(4) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Youth media consumption and disordered eating practices have historically been subjects of moral panics, often resulting in protective, deficit-based interventions like content removal. We argue for interventions which instead equip youth to evaluate and manage risks in their online environments, building upon their existing “information sensibility” practices. Drawing upon ethnographic research and intervention testing with 77 participants in the US and India, we analyze how youth (aged 13–26), including those with diverse political perspectives and those recovering from disordered eating (DE), engage with online news and health information. Participants generally algorithmically encountered (rather than searched for) information online, and their engagement was shaped more by social motivations—like belonging—than truth seeking. Participants interpreted online information collaboratively, relying on social cues and peer validation within their online communities. They demonstrated preference for personal testimonies and relatable sources, particularly those with similar social identities. We propose resilience-building interventions that build upon these youth online information practices by: (1) leveraging peer networks, promoting critical information engagement through collaborative learning and peer-to-peer support within online communities; (2) developing social media sensibility, equipping youth to critically evaluate information sources in situ; (3) providing pathways offline, connecting youth to desired in-person communities; and (4) encouraging probabilistic thinking. View details Reconfigurable Stream Network Architecture Chengyue Wang Xiaofan Zhang Jason Cong James Hoe International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA) (2025) Preview Preview abstract As AI systems grow increasingly specialized and complex, managing hardware heterogeneity becomes a pressing challenge. How can we efficiently coordinate and synchronize heterogeneous hardware resources to achieve high utilization? How can we minimize the friction of transitioning between diverse computation phases, reducing costly stalls from initialization, pipeline setup, or drain? Our insight is that a network abstraction at the ISA level naturally unifies heterogeneous resource orchestration and phase transitions. This paper presents a Reconfigurable Stream Network Architecture (RSN), a novel ISA abstraction designed for the DNN domain. RSN models the datapath as a circuit-switched network with stateful functional units as nodes and data streaming on the edges. Programming a computation corresponds to triggering a path. Software is explicitly exposed to the compute and communication latency of each functional unit, enabling precise control over data movement for optimizations such as compute-communication overlap and layer fusion. As nodes in a network naturally differ, the RSN abstraction can efficiently virtualize heterogeneous hardware resources by separating control from the data plane, enabling low instruction-level intervention. We build a proof-of-concept design RSN-XNN on VCK190, a heterogeneous platform with FPGA fabric and AI engines. Compared to the SOTA solution on this platform, it reduces latency by 6.1x and improves throughput by 2.4x-3.2x. Compared to the T4 GPU with the same FP32 performance, it matches latency with only 18% of the memory bandwidth. Compared to the A100 GPU at the same 7nm process node, it achieves 2.1x higher energy efficiency in FP32. View details Learning to Clarify: Multi-turn Conversations with Action-Based Contrastive Self-Training Max Chen Ruoxi Sun Tomas Pfister Sercan Arik 2025 Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs), optimized through human feedback, have rapidly emerged as a leading paradigm for developing intelligent conversational assistants. However, despite their strong performance across many benchmarks, LLM-based agents might still lack conversational skills such as disambiguation -- when they are faced with ambiguity, they often overhedge or implicitly guess users' true intents rather than asking clarification questions. Under task-specific settings, high-quality conversation samples are often limited, constituting a bottleneck for LLMs' ability to learn optimal dialogue action policies. We propose Action-Based Contrastive Self-Training (ACT), a quasi-online preference optimization algorithm based on Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), that enables data-efficient dialogue policy learning in multi-turn conversation modeling. We demonstrate ACT's efficacy under data-efficient tuning scenarios, even when there is no action label available, using multiple real-world conversational tasks: tabular-grounded question-answering, machine reading comprehension, and AmbigSQL, a novel task for disambiguating information-seeking requests for complex SQL generation towards data analysis agents. Additionally, we propose evaluating LLMs' ability to function as conversational agents by examining whether they can implicitly recognize and reason about ambiguity in conversation. ACT demonstrates substantial conversation modeling improvements over standard tuning approaches like supervised fine-tuning and DPO. View details Data Orchestration: Modernizing Legacy Data Orchestration with Cloud Gautami Nadkarni IJSR (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper discusses the migration of data orchestration workflows from a legacy tool like Autosys to a modern, cloud - based solution, Google Cloud Composer. It explores the transition from traditional job scheduling to Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) - based workflows using Apache Airflow, culminating in the deployment and management of these workflows in Cloud Composer. The benefits and challenges of this migration are examined, highlighting the advantages of scalability, flexibility, and cloud integration offered by Cloud Composer. View details Anchored diffusion for video face reenactment Idan Kligvasser Regev Cohen George Leifman Ehud Rivlin Michael Elad 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) (2025), pp. 4087-4097 Preview Preview abstract Video generation has drawn significant interest recently, pushing the development of large-scale models capable of producing realistic videos with coherent motion. Due to memory constraints, these models typically generate short video segments that are then combined into long videos. The merging process poses a significant challenge, as it requires ensuring smooth transitions and overall consistency. In this paper, we introduce Anchored Diffusion, a novel method for synthesizing relatively long and seamless videos. We extend Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) to incorporate temporal information, creating our sequence-DiT (sDiT) model for generating short video segments. Unlike previous works, we train our model on video sequences with random non-uniform temporal spacing and incorporate temporal information via external guidance, increasing flexibility and allowing it to capture both short and long-term relationships. Furthermore, during inference, we leverage the transformer architecture to modify the diffusion process, generating a batch of non-uniform sequences anchored to a common frame, ensuring consistency regardless of temporal distance. To demonstrate our method, we focus on face reenactment, a task of transforming the action from the driving video to the source face. Through comprehensive experiments, we show our approach outperforms current techniques in producing longer consistent high-quality videos while offering editing capabilities. View details Origin-destination travel demand estimation: an approach that scales worldwide, and its application to five metropolitan highway networks Chao Zhang Neha Arora Christopher Bian Yechen Li Willa Ng Andrew Tomkins Bin Yan Janny Zhang Carolina Osorio 2025 Preview Preview abstract Estimating Origin-Destination (OD) travel demand is vital for effective urban planning and traffic management. Developing universally applicable OD estimation methodologies is significantly challenged by the pervasive scarcity of high-fidelity traffic data and the difficulty in obtaining city-specific prior OD estimates (or seed ODs), which are often prerequisite for traditional approaches. Our proposed method directly estimates OD travel demand by systematically leveraging aggregated, anonymized statistics from Google Maps Traffic Trends, obviating the need for conventional census or city-provided OD data. The OD demand is estimated by formulating a single-level, one-dimensional, continuous nonlinear optimization problem with nonlinear equality and bound constraints to replicate highway path travel times. The method achieves efficiency and scalability by employing a differentiable analytical macroscopic network model. This model by design is computationally lightweight, distinguished by its parsimonious parameterization that requires minimal calibration effort and its capacity for instantaneous evaluation. These attributes ensure the method's broad applicability and practical utility across diverse cities globally. Using segment sensor counts from Los Angeles and San Diego highway networks, we validate our proposed approach, demonstrating a two-thirds to three-quarters improvement in the fit to segment count data over a baseline. Beyond validation, we establish the method's scalability and robust performance in replicating path travel times across diverse highway networks, including Seattle, Orlando, Denver, Philadelphia, and Boston. In these expanded evaluations, our method not only aligns with simulation-based benchmarks but also achieves an average 13% improvement in it's ability to fit travel time data compared to the baseline during afternoon peak hours. View details Mind the GAP: Geometry Aware Passthrough Mitigates Cybersickness Trishia Chemaly Mohit Goyal Francis Duan Vrushank Phadnis Sakar Khattar Bjorn Vlaskamp Ace Kulshrestha Eric Turner Aveek Purohit Greg Neiswander Konstantine Tsotsos 2025 Preview Preview abstract Virtual Reality headsets isolate users from the real-world by restricting their perception to the virtual-world. Video See-Through (VST) headsets address this by utilizing world-facing cameras to create Augmented Reality experiences. However, directly displaying camera feeds can cause visual discomfort and cybersickness due to the inaccurate perception of scale and exaggerated motion parallax. This paper presents initial findings on the potential of geometry aware passthrough systems to mitigate cybersickness through enhanced depth perception. We introduce a promising protocol for quantitatively measuring cybersickness experienced by users in VST headsets. Using this protocol, we conduct a user study to compare direct passthrough and geometry aware passthrough systems. To the best of our knowledge, our study is the first one to reveal reduced nausea, disorientation, and total scores of cybersickness with geometry aware passthrough. It also uncovers several potential avenues to further mitigate visually-induced discomfort. View details Scalable Private Partition Selection via Adaptive Weighting Morteza Zadimoghaddam Alessandro Epasto Justin Y. Chen Vincent Cohen-Addad Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning (2025) Preview Preview abstract In the differentially private partition selection problem (a.k.a. private set union, private key discovery), users hold subsets of items from an unbounded universe. The goal is to output as many items as possible from the union of the users' sets while maintaining user-level differential privacy. Solutions to this problem are a core building block for many privacy-preserving ML applications including vocabulary extraction in a private corpus, computing statistics over categorical data and learning embeddings over user-provided items. We propose an algorithm for this problem, MaxAdaptiveDegree(MAD), which adaptively reroutes weight from items with weight far above the threshold needed for privacy to items with smaller weight, thereby increasing the probability that less frequent items are output. Our algorithm can be efficiently implemented in massively parallel computation systems allowing scalability to very large datasets. We prove that our algorithm stochastically dominates the standard parallel algorithm for this problem. We also develop a two-round version of our algorithm, MAD2R, where results of the computation in the first round are used to bias the weighting in the second round to maximize the number of items output. In experiments, our algorithms provide the best results across the board among parallel algorithms and scale to datasets with hundreds of billions of items, up to three orders of magnitude larger than those analyzed by prior sequential algorithms. View details Automated loss of pulse detection on a commercial smartwatch Kamal Shah Anran Wang Yiwen Chen Anthony Stange Lawrence Cai Dinesh Puppala Matt Wimmer Pramod Rudrapatna Shelten Yuen Anupam Pathak Shwetak Patel Mark Malhotra Marc Stogaitis Jeanie Phan Ali Connell Bakul Patel Jim Taylor Jacqueline Shreibati Daniel McDuff Pushmeet Kohli Tajinder Gadh Jake Sunshine Nature, 642 (2025), pp. 174-181 Preview Preview abstract Out-of-hospital cardiac arrest is a time-sensitive emergency that requires prompt identification and intervention: sudden, unwitnessed cardiac arrest is nearly unsurvivable. A cardinal sign of cardiac arrest is sudden loss of pulse. Automated biosensor detection of unwitnessed cardiac arrest, and dispatch of medical assistance, may improve survivability given the substantial prognostic role of time, but only if the false-positive burden on public emergency medical systems is minimized. Here we show that a multimodal, machine learning-based algorithm on a smartwatch can reach performance thresholds making it deployable at a societal scale. First, using photoplethysmography, we show that wearable photoplethysmography measurements of peripheral pulselessness (induced through an arterial occlusion model) manifest similarly to pulselessness caused by a common cardiac arrest arrhythmia, ventricular fibrillation. On the basis of the similarity of the photoplethysmography signal (from ventricular fibrillation or arterial occlusion), we developed and validated a loss of pulse detection algorithm using data from peripheral pulselessness and free-living conditions. Following its development, we evaluated the end-to-end algorithm prospectively: there was 1 unintentional emergency call per 21.67 user-years across two prospective studies; the sensitivity was 67.23% (95% confidence interval of 64.32% to 70.05%) in a prospective arterial occlusion cardiac arrest simulation model. These results indicate an opportunity, deployable at scale, for wearable-based detection of sudden loss of pulse while minimizing societal costs of excess false detections. View details Scaling ML Workloads with Google's Evolving Data Center Network Architecture Anny Zheng Remy Chang Leon Poutievski 2025 Preview Preview abstract We discuss the challenges posed by growing machine learning workloads on datacenter networks and present how Google’s Jupiter network fabrics effectively support diverse traffic. View details VLOGGER: Multimodal Diffusion for Embodied Avatar Synthesis Enric Corona Andrei Zanfir Eduard Gabriel Bazavan Nikos Kolotouros Thiemo Alldieck Cristian Sminchisescu Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference (CVPR) (2025) Preview Preview abstract We propose VLOGGER, a method for audio-driven human video generation from a single input image of a person, which builds on the success of recent generative diffusion models. Our method consists of 1) a stochastic human-to3d-motion diffusion model, and 2) a novel diffusion-based architecture that augments text-to-image models with both spatial and temporal controls. This supports the generation of high quality video of variable length, easily controllable through text or speech via high-level representations of human faces and bodies. In contrast to previous work, our method does not require training for each person, does not rely on face detection and cropping, generates the complete image (not just the face or the lips), and considers a broad spectrum of scenarios (e.g. visible torso or diverse subject identities) that are critical to correctly synthesize humans who communicate. We also curate MENTOR, a new and diverse dataset with 3d pose and expression annotations, one order of magnitude larger than previous ones (800,000 identities) and with dynamic gestures, where we train and ablate our main technical contributions. VLOGGER outperforms state-of-the-art methods in three public benchmarks, considering image quality, identity preservation and temporal consistency while also generating upperbody gestures. We analyze the performance of VLOGGER with respect to multiple diversity metrics, showing that our architectural choices and the use of MENTOR benefit training a fair and unbiased model at scale. Finally we show applications in video editing and personalization. View details Scalability of Generative AI Models: Challenges and Opportunities in Large-Scale Data Generation and Training Nivedita Kumari International Journal of Computer Science and Information Technology Research (IJCSITR) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Scalability of Generative AI Models: Challenges and Opportunities in Large-Scale Data Generation and Training View details 10 11 12 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
