 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 181 - 195 of 676 publications chip template Remove Score-based Causal Representation Learning: Linear and General Transformations Abhishek Kumar Emre Acarturk Karthikeyan Shanmugam Ali Tajer Burak Varici Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper addresses intervention-based causal representation learning (CRL) under a general nonparametric latent causal model and an unknown transformation that maps the latent variables to the observed variables. Linear and general transformations are investigated. The paper addresses both the identifiability and achievability aspects. Identifiability refers to determining algorithm-agnostic conditions that ensure recovering the true latent causal variables and the latent causal graph underlying them. Achievability refers to the algorithmic aspects and addresses designing algorithms that achieve identifiability guarantees. By drawing novel connections between score functions (i.e., the gradients of the logarithm of density functions) and CRL, this paper designs a score-based class of algorithms that ensures both identifiability and achievability. First, the paper focuses on linear transformations and shows that one stochastic hard intervention per node suffices to guarantee identifiability. It also provides partial identifiability guarantees for soft interventions, including identifiability up to ancestors for general causal models and perfect latent graph recovery for sufficiently non-linear causal models. Secondly, it focuses on general transformations and shows that two stochastic hard interventions per node suffice for identifiability. Notably, one does not need to know which pair of interventional environments have the same node intervened. View details GitChameleon 2.0: Evaluating AI Code Generation Against Python Library Version Incompatibilities Diganta Misra Nizar Islah Victor May Brice Rauby Zihan Wang Justine Gehring Antonio Orvieto Muawiz Chaudhary Eilif Muller Irina Rish Samira Ebrahimi Kahou Massimo Caccia 2025 Preview Preview abstract The rapid evolution of software libraries poses a considerable hurdle for code generation, necessitating continuous adaptation to frequent version updates while preserving backward compatibility. While existing code evolution benchmarks provide valuable insights, they typically lack execution-based evaluation for generating code compliant with specific library versions. To address this, we introduce GitChameleon 2.0, a novel, meticulously curated dataset comprising 328 Python code completion problems, each conditioned on specific library versions and accompanied by executable unit tests. GitChameleon 2.0 rigorously evaluates the capacity of contemporary large language models (LLMs), LLM-powered agents, code assistants, and RAG systems to perform version-conditioned code generation that demonstrates functional accuracy through execution. Our extensive evaluations indicate that state-of-the-art systems encounter significant challenges with this task; enterprise models achieving baseline success rates in the 48-51% range, underscoring the intricacy of the problem. By offering an execution-based benchmark emphasizing the dynamic nature of code libraries, GitChameleon 2.0 enables a clearer understanding of this challenge and helps guide the development of more adaptable and dependable AI code generation methods. View details Score-based Causal Representation Learning: Linear and General Transformations Burak Varici Emre Acarturk Karthikeyan Shanmugam Abhishek Kumar Ali Tajer Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR) 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper addresses intervention-based causal representation learning (CRL) under a general nonparametric latent causal model and an unknown transformation that maps the latent variables to the observed variables. Linear and general transformations are investigated. The paper addresses both the identifiability and achievability aspects. Identifiability refers to determining algorithm-agnostic conditions that ensure the recovery of the true latent causal variables and the underlying latent causal graph. Achievability refers to the algorithmic aspects and addresses designing algorithms that achieve identifiability guarantees. By drawing novel connections between score functions (i.e., the gradients of the logarithm of density functions) and CRL, this paper designs a score-based class of algorithms that ensures both identifiability and achievability. First, the paper focuses on linear transformations and shows that one stochastic hard intervention per node suffices to guarantee identifiability. It also provides partial identifiability guarantees for soft interventions, including identifiability up to mixing with parents for general causal models and perfect recovery of the latent graph for sufficiently nonlinear causal models. Secondly, it focuses on general transformations and demonstrates that two stochastic hard interventions per node are sufficient for identifiability. This is achieved by defining a differentiable loss function whose global optima ensure identifiability for general CRL. Notably, one does not need to know which pair of interventional environments has the same node intervened. Finally, the theoretical results are empirically validated via experiments on structured synthetic data and image data. View details Beyond the Crawl: Unmasking Browser Fingerprinting in Real User Interactions Muthu Selva Annamalai, Meenatchi Sundaram Emiliano De Cristofaro Igor Bilogrevic WWW (2025) Preview Preview abstract Browser fingerprinting is an online tracking technique that is being increasingly adopted for profiling and ad targeting purposes. While prior work has analyzed the prevalence and impact of browser fingerprinting on the Web, they have traditionally relied on large-scale automated crawls. Naturally, these cannot replicate real-human interactions, e.g., solve CAPTCHAs, evade bot detectors, or operate behind login pages and paywalls. This prompts the question as to whether or not the fingerprinting ecosystem is appreciably different in real-world browsing sessions. In this paper, we begin to address this question by designing and conducting a user study aimed at collecting actual telemetry data from real browsing sessions of 30 users. We find that almost half of the fingerprinting websites identified from real user browsing sessions are missed by equivalent automated crawls. This is mainly due to the inability of automated crawls to identify and visit authentication pages, being blocked by bot detectors, and/or failing to perform user interactions that specifically trigger browser fingerprinting scripts. We also find new fingerprinting vectors that are consistently present in fingerprinting scripts captured by real user browsing sessions yet missing from automated crawls. Finally, we assess the feasibility of collecting fingerprinting training data in a privacy-preserving way. We conclude that private models built on real user browsing sessions can detect browser fingerprinting more effectively than models trained on automated crawls alone, while simultaneously providing strong privacy guarantees to users. View details Before hands disappear: Effect of early warning visual feedback method for hand tracking failures in virtual reality Mucahit Gemici Vrushank Phadnis Anil Ufuk Batmaz PLOSOne (2025) Preview Preview abstract Virtual hand representation in Head-Mounted Displays (HMDs) offers immersive and intuitive interactions in Virtual Reality (VR). However, current hand tracking algorithms are prone to errors, which can disrupt the user experience and hinder task performance. This paper presents a novel method for providing users with visual feedback when the quality of hand tracking decreases. Our approach employs a notification modal that warns users of potential failures. We identified three common hand tracking failure scenarios and evaluated the effectiveness of our method in two distinct VR tasks: object manipulation and complex assembly tasks. Results show that our early warning system reduces task completion time, lowers hand-tracking failures by up to 83%, decreases errors, improves system usability, and reduces cognitive load. This work contributes to the development of more robust and user-friendly VR HMD applications by enhancing hand tracking reliability, usability, and workload. View details Byte by Byte: Unmasking Browser Fingerprinting at the Function Level using V8 Bytecode Transformers Pouneh Nikkhah Bahrami Dylan Cutler Igor Bilogrevic ACM CCS (to appear) (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Browser fingerprinting enables persistent cross-site user tracking via subtle techniques that often evade conventional defenses or cause website breakage when script-level blocking countermeasures are applied. Addressing these challenges requires detection methods offering both function-level precision to minimize breakage and inherent robustness against code obfuscation and URL manipulation. We introduce ByteDefender, the first system leveraging V8 engine bytecode to detect fingerprinting operations specifically at the JavaScript function level. A Transformer-based classifier, trained offline on bytecode sequences, accurately identifies functions exhibiting fingerprinting behavior. We develop and evaluate lightweight signatures derived from this model to enable low-overhead, on-device matching against function bytecode during compilation but prior to execution, which only adds a 4% (average) latency to the page load time. This mechanism facilitates targeted, real-time prevention of fingerprinting function execution, thereby preserving legitimate script functionality. Operating directly on bytecode ensures inherent resilience against common code obfuscation and URL-based evasion. Our evaluation on the top 100k websites demonstrates high detection accuracy at both function- and script-level, with substantial improvements over state-of-the-art AST-based methods, particularly in robustness against obfuscation. ByteDefender offers a practical framework for effective, precise, and robust fingerprinting mitigation. View details Perch 2.0: The Bittern Lesson for Bioacoustics Bart van Merriënboer Vincent Dumoulin Jenny Hamer Lauren Harrell Andrea Burns Tom Denton arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Perch is a performant pre-trained model for bioacoustics. It was trained in supervised fashion, providing both off-the-shelf classification scores for thousands of vocalizing species as well as strong embeddings for transfer learning. In this new release, Perch 2.0, we expand from training exclusively on avian species to a large multi-taxa dataset. The model is trained with self-distillation using a prototype-learning classifier as well as a new source-prediction training criterion. Perch 2.0 obtains state-of-the-art performance on the BirdSet and BEANS benchmarks. It also outperforms specialized marine models on marine transfer learning tasks, despite having almost no marine training data. We present hypotheses as to why fine-grained species classification is a particularly robust pre-training task for bioacoustics. View details Steering Self-Evaluation: Interpreting LLM’s Reasoning Across Domains and Languages Praveen Hegde 2025 Preview Preview abstract Understanding and controlling the reasoning processes of large language models (LLMs) is crucial for their reliable deployment. In this work, we investigate the latent representation of self-evaluation behavior - the ability of a model to assess its own reasoning steps - a vital behavior for robust reasoning. Through targeted steering vector computation, we identify a direction within LLM activations that represents this self-evaluation behavior. Crucially, we demonstrate that this steering vector for self-evaluation exhibits remarkable cross-contextual efficacy, working well across different domains (e.g., math and medicine) and languages (e.g., English and Spanish). This suggests that the identified latent direction captures a fundamental, abstract representation of self-evaluation within the LLM's internal state, offering a promising avenue for interpretable and controllable reasoning across diverse applications. View details Scalable Private Partition Selection via Adaptive Weighting Morteza Zadimoghaddam Alessandro Epasto Justin Y. Chen Vincent Cohen-Addad Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning (2025) Preview Preview abstract In the differentially private partition selection problem (a.k.a. private set union, private key discovery), users hold subsets of items from an unbounded universe. The goal is to output as many items as possible from the union of the users' sets while maintaining user-level differential privacy. Solutions to this problem are a core building block for many privacy-preserving ML applications including vocabulary extraction in a private corpus, computing statistics over categorical data and learning embeddings over user-provided items. We propose an algorithm for this problem, MaxAdaptiveDegree(MAD), which adaptively reroutes weight from items with weight far above the threshold needed for privacy to items with smaller weight, thereby increasing the probability that less frequent items are output. Our algorithm can be efficiently implemented in massively parallel computation systems allowing scalability to very large datasets. We prove that our algorithm stochastically dominates the standard parallel algorithm for this problem. We also develop a two-round version of our algorithm, MAD2R, where results of the computation in the first round are used to bias the weighting in the second round to maximize the number of items output. In experiments, our algorithms provide the best results across the board among parallel algorithms and scale to datasets with hundreds of billions of items, up to three orders of magnitude larger than those analyzed by prior sequential algorithms. View details Calibration Properties of Time-Series Foundation Models: An Empirical Analysis Coen Adler Samar Abdi Yuxin Chang Padhraic Smyth 2025 Preview Preview abstract Recent development of foundation models for time series data has generated considerable interest in using such models across a variety of applications. Although they achieve state-of-the-art predictive performance, the ability to produce well-calibrated probabilistic distributions is critical for practical applications and is relatively underexplored. In this paper, we investigate the calibration-related properties of five recent time series foundation models and two competitive baselines. We perform systematic evaluations and identify significant variation in calibration performances across models. View details User-Centered Delivery of AI-Powered Health Care Technologies in Clinical Settings: Mixed Methods Case Study Meredith Schreier Randall Brandt Hien Brown T Saensuksopa Christine Silva Laura Vardoulakis JMIR Human Factors (2025) Preview Preview abstract Background: Providers spend a large percentage of their day using electronic health record (EHR) technology and frequently report frustration when EHR tasks are time-consuming and effortful. To solve these challenges, artificial intelligence (AI)–based enhancements to EHR technology are increasingly being deployed. However, AI-based implementations for EHR features often lack user-centered evaluation. Objective: This study evaluates, using a user-centered approach, the implementation of an AI-powered search and clinical discovery tool within an EHR system. Methods: We conducted a mixed methods study consisting of interviews, observations, and surveys for 5 months. Results: High adoption rates for the AI-based features (163/176, 93% users after 3 months) and significant increases across key metrics, including user satisfaction (U=49; P View details MaRVL-QA: A Benchmark for Mathematical Reasoning over Visual Landscapes Nilay Pande Sahiti Yerramilli Jayant Tamarapalli Rynaa Grover arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.17180 (2025) Preview Preview abstract A key frontier for Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) is the ability to perform deep mathematical and spatial reasoning directly from images, moving beyond their established success in semantic description. Mathematical surface plots provide a rigorous testbed for this capability, as they isolate the task of reasoning from the semantic noise common in natural images. To measure progress on this frontier, we introduce MaRVL (Mathematical Reasoning over Visual Landscapes), a new benchmark designed to quantitatively evaluate these core reasoning skills. The benchmark comprises two novel tasks: Topological Counting, identifying and enumerating features like local maxima; and Transformation Recognition, recognizing applied geometric transformations. Generated from a curated library of functions with rigorous ambiguity filtering, our evaluation on MaRVL reveals that even state-of-the-art MLLMs struggle significantly, often resorting to superficial heuristics instead of robust spatial reasoning. MaRVL provides a challenging new tool for the research community to measure progress, expose model limitations, and guide the development of MLLMs with more profound reasoning abilities. View details Choosing Measurement Frameworks to Fit your Organizational Goals Sarah D'Angelo Ambar Murillo Sarah Inman Kevin Storer DORA, Google (2025) Preview Preview abstract Measuring software development can help drive impactful change. However, it’s a complex task, and getting started can be daunting as it involves understanding what you should measure, and determining what you can measure. This article provides a guide to selecting a framework that aligns with organizational measurement strategy. View details Sensible Agent: A Framework for Unobtrusive Interaction with Proactive AR Agent Geonsun Lee Min Xia Nels Numan Xun Qian David Li Yanhe Chen Ace Kulshrestha Ishan Chatterjee Yinda Zhang Dinesh Manocha David Kim Ruofei Du Proceedings of the 39th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology (UIST), ACM (2025), pp. 22 Preview Preview abstract Proactive AR agents promise context-aware assistance, but their interactions often rely on explicit voice prompts or responses, which can be disruptive or socially awkward. We introduce Sensible Agent, a framework designed for unobtrusive interaction with these proactive agents. Sensible Agent dynamically adapts both “what” assistance to offer and, crucially, “how” to deliver it, based on real-time multimodal context sensing. Informed by an expert workshop (n=12) and a data annotation study (n=40), the framework leverages egocentric cameras, multimodal sensing, and Large Multimodal Models (LMMs) to infer context and suggest appropriate actions delivered via minimally intrusive interaction modes. We demonstrate our prototype on an XR headset through a user study (n=10) in both AR and VR scenarios. Results indicate that Sensible Agent significantly reduces perceived intrusiveness and interaction effort compared to voice-prompted baseline, while maintaining high utility. View details PageFlex: Flexible and Efficient User-space Delegation of Linux Paging Policies with eBPF Anil Yelam Kan Wu Zhiyuan Guo Suli Yang Rajath Shashidhara Wei Xu Stanko Novakovic Alex Snoeren Kim Keeton 2025 Preview Preview abstract To increase platform memory efficiency, hyperscalers like Google and Meta transparently demote “cold” application data to cheaper cost-per-byte memory tiers like compressed memory and NVMe SSDs. These systems rely on standard kernel paging policies and mechanisms to maximize the achievable memory savings without hurting application performance. Although the literature promises better policies, implementing and deploying them within the Linux kernel is challenging. Delegating policies and mechanisms to user space, through userfaultfd or library-based approaches, incurs overheads and may require modifying application code. We present PageFlex, a framework for delegating Linux paging policies to user space with minimal overhead and full compatibility with existing real-world deployments. PageFlex uses eBPF to delegate policy decisions while providing low-overhead access to in-kernel memory state and access information, thus balancing flexibility and performance. Additionally, PageFlex supports different paging strategies for distinct memory regions and application phases. We show that PageFlex can delegate existing kernel-based policies with little ( View details 13 14 15 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
