 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 586 - 600 of 676 publications chip template Remove Rankers, Judges, and Assistants: Towards Understanding the Interplay of LLMs in Information Retrieval Evaluation Krisztian Balog Don Metzler Zhen Qin Proceedings of the 48th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly integral to information retrieval (IR), powering ranking, evaluation, and AI-assisted content creation. This widespread adoption necessitates a critical examination of potential biases arising from the interplay between these LLM-based components. This paper synthesizes existing research and presents novel experiment designs that explore how LLM-based rankers and assistants influence LLM-based judges. We provide the first empirical evidence of LLM judges exhibiting significant bias towards LLM-based rankers. Furthermore, we observe limitations in LLM judges' ability to discern subtle system performance differences. Contrary to some previous findings, our preliminary study does not find evidence of bias against AI-generated content. These results highlight the need for a more holistic view of the LLM-driven information ecosystem. To this end, we offer initial guidelines and a research agenda to ensure the reliable use of LLMs in IR evaluation. View details Tensorized Interior Radiative Heat Transfer for a Scalable and Calibrated Building Energy Simulator Sang woo Ham Donghun Kim Michael Rossetti John Sipple 2025 Preview Preview abstract Building energy simulation is a critical tool for developing and testing advanced control strategies, such as Reinforcement Learn- ing (RL), to provide demand flexibility and affordable energy costs. The recently introduced Smart Buildings Control Suite (sbsim) provides a lightweight, scalable, and data-calibrated simulation environment based on a 2D finite-difference model. However, the initial model primarily focused on conductive and convective heat transfer, neglecting the significant impact of long-wave radiative heat exchange between interior surfaces. This paper presents a significant extension to the sbsim framework by incorporating a physically-grounded model for interior radiative heat transfer. Our primary contribution is the development and integration of a fully tensorized radiative heat transfer module, which preserves the com- putational efficiency and scalability of the original simulator. This was achieved by developing a pipeline for view factor calculation, including an algorithm to identify directly seeing surfaces within complex floor plans, and formulating the net radiation equations for efficient execution on modern hardware accelerators. We val- idate the numerical accuracy of our tensorized implementation by comparing its results against a traditional iterative approach, demonstrating identical outcomes. This enhancement increases the physical fidelity of sbsim, enabling more accurate training of RL agents for building energy optimization. View details DORA AI Capabilities Model Ameer Abbas Derek DeBellis Rob Edwards Nathen Harvey Vivian Hu Amanda Lewis Eric Maxwell Dave Stanke Kevin Storer Lucia Subatin Cedric Yao DORA, Google (2025) Preview Preview abstract Generative AI is rapidly reshaping the software development landscape, presenting both exciting opportunities and complex challenges. This report offers research-backed guidance for leaders and practitioners to effectively navigate this transformation, providing actionable insights to maximize AI's benefits while mitigating potential risks. Based on extensive data and developer interviews, the report moves beyond the hype to offer a nuanced perspective on AI's impact on individuals, teams, and organizations. View details Tournament design: a tutorial for WINE 2025 Ariel Schvartzman (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Tournament design is a field at the intersection of mechanism design and social choice which studies the question of how to choose the winner of a round-robin tournament under reasonable desired properties. This problem and some results were recently explained in a Research Blog Post by me: https://research.google/blog/can-algorithms-make-sports-tournament-cheating-obsolete/ The point of this tutorial would be to present the results in the blog, together with some novel results, to a technical audience (as opposed to a wide audience). View details In-situ mixer sideband calibration with superconducting qubits Zhang Jiang Wojtek Mruczkiewicz Jonathan Gross Élie Genois Masaya Fukami (2025) Preview Preview abstract Precise microwave control is critical for the optimal performance of superconducting quantum processors. We present an in-situ sideband calibration technique of IQ mixers with superconducting qubits, enabling the diagnosis and elimination of unwanted image-sideband signals without additional hardware. Although such calibration could be achieved by adjusting the qubit frequency to be resonant with the image sideband and minimizing the Rabi oscillation driven by the image sideband, it is inherently limited by the qubit's flux-tuning frequency range. To overcome this limitation, we propose a novel strategy to learn and correct imperfect mixer phases. Our experimental validation confirms the effectiveness of this protocol in precisely canceling the image sideband, enhancing quantum processor functionality. View details Generative Model Integration with Code Editing Piyush Arora Karthik Ramachandran Salem Haykal Wendy Yun Patent (2025) Preview Preview abstract Aspects of the disclosed technology include computer-implemented systems and methods for integrating machine-learned generative models with code editing tools. A code editor is configured to execute computer-executable code within code cells of a code editor interface including a first interface portion and a second interface portion. The interface portion is configured to receive user input for defining and editing a set of code cells within the first interface portion. Each code cell of the set of code cells is independently executable by the code editor application. The second interface portion is configured to receive user input for defining and submitting user queries to a machine-learned generative model. The code editor is configured to modify at least one code cell of the set of cells based at least in part on an output of the machine-learned generative model in response to a user query. View details Visual Question Answer evaluation dataset for MIMIC CXR Atilla Kiraly Timo Kohlberger Andrew Sellergren Fayaz Jamil Charles Lau Tom Pollard (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract MIMIC CXR is a large publicly available dataset of chest radiographs in DICOM format with free-text radiology reports. In addition, labels for the presence of 12 different chest-related pathologies, as well as of any support devices, and overall normal/abnormal status were made available via the MIMIC Chest X-ray JPG (MIMIC-CXR-JPG) [2] labels, which were generated using the CheXpert and NegBio algorithm. Based on these labels, we created a small visual question answering dataset comprising 224 questions for 48 cases from the official test set, and 111 questions for 33 validation cases. 68% of the questions are close-ended (answerable with yes or no), and focus on the presence of one out of 15 chest pathologies, or any support device, or generically on any abnormality, whereas the remaining open-ended questions inquire about the location, size, severity or type of a pathology/device, if present in the specific case, indicated by the MIMIC-CXR-JPG labels. For each question and case we also provide a reference answer, which was authored by a board-certified radiologist based on the chest X-ray and original radiology report. View details FastPoint: Accelerating Point Cloud Model Inference with Sample Point Distance Prediction Donghyun Lee Jae W. Lee Hongil Yoon 2025 Preview Preview abstract Deep neural networks have revolutionized 3D point cloud processing, yet efficiently handling large and irregular point clouds remains challenging. To tackle this problem, we introduce FastPoint, a novel software-based acceleration technique that leverages the predictable distance trend between sampled points during farthest point sampling. By predicting the distance curve, we can efficiently identify subsequent sample points without exhaustively computing all pairwise distances. Our proposal substantially accelerates farthest point sampling and neighbor search operations while preserving sampling quality and model performance. By integrating FastPoint into state-of-the-art 3D point cloud models, we achieve 2.55× end-to-end speedup on NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU without sacrificing accuracy. View details Dialogue to Questions Generation for Evidence-based Medical Guideline Agent Development Zongliang Ji Ziyang Zhang Xincheng Tan Matthew Thompson Anna Goldenberg Carl Yang Rahul G. Krishnan Fan Zhang Machine Learning for Health 2025, PLMR Preview Preview abstract Evidence-based medicine (EBM) is central to high-quality care, yet remains difficult to implement in fast-paced primary care visits. Physicians face short consultations, increasing patient loads, and lengthy guideline documents that are impractical to consult in real time. To address this gap, we investigate the feasibility of using large language models (LLMs) as ambient assistants that generate targeted, evidence-based questions during physician–patient encounters. Our study focuses on the question generation stage rather than answering, with the aim of scaffolding physician reasoning and integrating guideline-based practice into brief consultations. We implemented two prompting strategies, a zero-shot baseline and a multi-stage reasoning variant, using Gemini~2.5 as the backbone model. We evaluated outputs on a benchmark of 80 de-identified transcripts from real clinical encounters, with six experienced physicians conducting over 80 hours of structured evaluation. Results indicate that while general-purpose LLMs are not yet fully reliable, they can produce clinically meaningful and guideline-relevant questions, suggesting significant potential to reduce cognitive burden and make EBM more actionable in everyday practice. View details Zero-shot Cross-domain Knowledge distillation: A Case study on YouTube Music Srivaths Ranganathan Chieh Lo Bernardo Cunha Nikhil Khani Li Wei Aniruddh Nath Shawn Andrews Gergo Varady Yanwei Song Jochen Klingenhoefer 2025 Preview Preview abstract Knowledge Distillation (KD) has been widely used to improve the quality of latency sensitive models serving live traffic. However, applying KD in production recommender systems with low traffic is challenging: the limited amount of data restricts the teacher model size, and the cost of training a large dedicated teacher may not be justified. Cross-domain KD offers a cost-effective alternative by leveraging a teacher from a data-rich source domain, but introduces unique technical difficulties, as the features, user interfaces, and prediction tasks can significantly differ. We present a case study of using zero-shot cross-domain KD for multi-task ranking models, transferring knowledge from a (100X) large-scale video recommendation platform (YouTube) to a music recommendation application with significantly lower traffic. We present offline and live experiment results and share learnings from evaluating different KD techniques in this setting across two ranking models on the YouTube Music application. Our results demonstrate that zero-shot cross-domain KD is a practical and effective approach to improve the performance of a ranking model on a low traffic surface. View details Enhancing Online Ranking Systems via Multi-SurfaceCo-Training for Content Understanding Gwendolyn Zhao Yilin Zheng Raghu Keshavan Lukasz Heldt Qian Sun Fabio Soldo Li Wei Aniruddh Nath Nikhil Khani Weilong Yang Dapo Omidiran Rein Zhang Mei Chen Lichan Hong Xinyang Yi 2025 Preview Preview abstract Content understanding is an important part in real-world recommendation systems. This paper introduces a Multi-surface Co-training (MulCo) system, designed to enhance online ranking systems by improving content understanding. The model is trained through a task-aligned co-training approach, leveraging objectives and data from multiple surfaces and various pre-trained em-beddings. It separates video content understanding into an offline model, enabling scalability and efficient resource use. Experiments demonstrate that MulCo significantly outperforms non-task-aligned pre-trained embeddings and achieves substantial gains in online satisfied engagement metrics. This system presents a practical solution to improve content understanding in multi-surface large-scale recommender systems. View details A System for Synchronizing Artificial Intelligence Model Context with External Data Sources Colby Hawker Piyush Arora TDCommons (2025) Preview Preview abstract Artificial intelligence (AI) models that depend on context from external data sources may produce outdated responses as underlying information, such as database schemas or web content, changes over time. The described system compartmentalizes AI model context into static and dynamic components. A static context may comprise fixed rules, safety policies, and format requirements. A dynamic context can be populated by a user-provided script configured to run at a specified frequency. This script can fetch, structure, and cache data from external sources, for instance APIs or databases, using stored credentials. This method allows AI models to operate with more current information from external environments, which can help outputs remain synchronized and adhere to predefined operational policies, potentially reducing the need for manual context updates. View details System for Recommending AI Model Configurations with Human-in-the-Loop Oversight Piyush Arora Adam Glazier Colby Hawker Jaime Sonoda Sönke Rohde TDCommons (2025) Preview Preview abstract Configuring and optimizing artificial intelligence (AI) models for specific tasks can be a complex process that may involve deep technical expertise and iterative manual experimentation. This disclosure describes a system, which may be implemented as a self-improving AI agent, that can assist in automating this process by interpreting a user's intent to recommend a suitable AI model and configuration. The agent can analyze available models and propose settings, for example, system instructions, grounding data, and operational parameters. The system can also perform background evaluations to provide empirical data and a rationale for its recommendation. A human-in-the-loop component may be included to present proposed optimizations to a user for approval before the optimizations are implemented. This approach can aid in streamlining AI model optimization for a broader range of users, help align model behavior with user goals, and reduce the likelihood of unintended outcomes through controlled, human-validated improvements. View details Day-of-the-week Awareness in Time of Day Breakpoints for Traffic Light Plans Eliav Buchnik Ori Rottenstreich 2025 Preview Preview abstract Time-of-day breakpoints (TODs) refer to the times over the day in which the plan of a traffic light is changed. Traditionally, TODs are selected jointly for all weekdays (Monday-Friday), typically with additional TODs dedicated to weekends. In this paper, we present an alternative approach motivated by traffic characteristics that can differ among the weekdays Monday-Friday and consider TODs which are day-of-the-week aware. The traffic-aware approach studies similarities among days and computes TODs that can be shared among days with similar characteristics but can also have other forms for weekdays with unique characteristics. Based on traffic properties derived from anonymized trajectories, we apply the new methodology to compute time-of-day breakpoints that are day-of-the-week aware in the city of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil and estimate the impact of the new methodology. View details Fine-grained Measurement of Vehicle Delay Fairness Eliav Buchnik Avishai Zagoury Tom Kalvari Jack Haddad Dotan Emanuel Dan Karliner Danny Veikherman Ron Tsibulsky Shai Ferster Ori Rottenstreich Avinatan Hassidim 2025 Preview Preview abstract Optimizing signal timing in traffic lights helps to improve traffic flow and reduce emissions through reducing delays. At intersections, vehicles from different movements observe different delays impacted by the traffic light plan. This paper analyzes delay fairness among various vehicles at intersections. We refer to three cities: Rio de Janeiro, Hamburg and Seattle with a total number of over 5100 intersections. We present an intuitive methodology to compute delay fairness based on Gini index, a common fairness measure in economics. We evaluate the fairness based on real traffic data and provide insights on the relationship of fairness with day hours and traffic demand. We also examine real changes in traffic light plans that occurred in practice to check whether improving delay is often aligned with increasing fairness. View details 40 41 42 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
