 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 76 - 90 of 676 publications chip template Remove Unprecedented Insights into Maternal Sleep: A Large-scale Longitudinal Analysis of Real-world Wearable Device Data Before, During, and After Pregnancy Nichole Young-Lin Conor Heneghan Yun Liu Logan Schneider Logan Niehaus Ariel Haney Mercy Asiedu Karla Gleichauf Jacqueline Shreibati Belen Lafon Lancet eBioMedicine (2025) Preview Preview abstract Introduction: Current understanding of pregnancy and postpartum sleep is driven by limited lab or self-reported data. Consumer wearable devices may help reveal longitudinal, real-world sleep patterns. Methods: We analyzed de-identified wearable device data from 2,540 users in the United States and Canada who met strict wear-time requirements (≥80% daily usage for ≥80% of the time periods of interest [12 weeks prepregnancy, throughout pregnancy, and 20 weeks immediately postpartum]). We tracked sleep time and staging using Fitbit devices. Results: Compared to prepregnancy, total sleep time (TST) increased from an average of 425.3±43.5 min to a peak of 447.6±47.6 min at gestational week 10 with ongoing declines throughout pregnancy. Time in bed (TIB) followed a similar pattern. Increased light sleep drove the initial TST rise. Deep and REM sleep decreased significantly throughout pregnancy, with maximum reductions of 19.2±13.8 min (p View details Participatory AI Considerations for Advancing Racial Health Equity Andrea G. Parker Laura M. Vardoulakis Jatin Alla Christina N. Harrington Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Health-related artificial intelligence (health AI) systems are being rapidly created, largely without input from racially minoritized communities who experience persistent health inequities and stand to be negatively affected if these systems are poorly designed. Addressing this problematic trend, we critically review prior work focused on the participatory design of health AI innovations (participatory AI research), surfacing eight gaps in this work that inhibit racial health equity and provide strategies for addressing these gaps. Our strategies emphasize that “participation” in design must go beyond typical focus areas of data collection, annotation, and application co-design, to also include co-generating overarching health AI agendas and policies. Further, participatory AI methods must prioritize community-centered design that supports collaborative learning around health equity and AI, addresses root causes of inequity and AI stakeholder power dynamics, centers relationalism and emotion, supports flourishing, and facilitates longitudinal design. These strategies will help catalyze research that advances racial health equity. View details PAIGE: Examining Student Learning Outcomes and Experiences with Personalized AI-Generated Podcasts Tiffany Do Usama Bin Shafqat Elsie Ling Νikhil Sarda 2025 Preview Preview abstract Generative AI is revolutionizing content creation and holds promise for real-time, personalized educational experiences. We investigated the effectiveness of converting textbook chapters into AI-generated podcasts and explored the impact of personalizing these podcasts for individual learner profiles. We conducted a 3x3 user study with 180 college students in the United States, comparing traditional textbook reading with both generalized and personalized AI-generated podcasts across three textbook subjects. The personalized podcasts were tailored to students’ majors, interests, and learning styles. Our findings show that students found the AI-generated podcast format to be more enjoyable than textbooks and that personalized podcasts led to significantly improved learning outcomes, although this was subject-specific. These results highlight that AI-generated podcasts can offer an engaging and effective modality transformation of textbook material, with personalization enhancing content relevance. We conclude with design recommendations for leveraging AI in education, informed by student feedback. View details IM-DD vs. Coherent in Datacenters: A Revisit in 2025 Xiang Zhou Optical Fiber Communication (OFC) Conference 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract This tutorial examines the progress and scaling limitations of IM-DD based optical technologies and explores how datacenter use cases optimized coherent technology, including a newly proposed polarization-folding, time-diversity approach and a novel single-sideband coherent detection technology—can address some of these challenges View details Zoom in, Zoom out, Reframe: Domain Experts’ Strategies for Addressing Non-Experts’ Complex Questions Beverly Freeman Roma Ruparel Laura Vardoulakis Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Consumers rely on the Internet for expert information in domains such as healthcare and law. Large Language Models (LLMs) have the potential to increase access to expert knowledge. However, past research has not addressed how to handle certain aspects of complex questions that commonly occur in expert-layperson interactions. We conducted in-depth interviews with 26 experts across multiple domains to understand how they experience and respond to challenges associated with non-experts’ questions. Results from a thematic analysis reveal three recurring strategies that experts across domains employ when fielding complex questions. Experts zoom in to clarify details of a broad information request, zoom out to address overly narrow questions or assumptions, and reframe when the underlying need is unstated or poorly represented. We discuss implications for the design of LLM-based experiences that facilitate access to expert information. View details Generative AI for medical education: Insights from a case study with medical students and an AI tutor for clinical reasoning Amy Wang Roma Ruparel Anna Iurchenko Paul Jhun Julie Anne Seguin Patricia Strachan Renee Wong Alan Karthikesalingam Yossi Matias Avinatan Hassidim Dale Webster Christopher Semturs Jonathan Krause Mike Schaekermann CHI (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI), particularly Large Language Models (LLMs), have demonstrated significant potential in clinical reasoning skills such as history-taking and differential diagnosis generation—critical aspects of medical education. This work explores how LLMs can augment medical curricula through interactive learning. We conducted a participatory design process with medical students, residents and medical education experts to co-create an AI-powered tutor prototype for clinical reasoning. As part of the co-design process, we conducted a qualitative user study, investigating learning needs and practices via interviews, and conducting concept evaluations through interactions with the prototype. Findings highlight the challenges learners face in transitioning from theoretical knowledge to practical application, and how an AI tutor can provide personalized practice and feedback. We conclude with design considerations, emphasizing the importance of context-specific knowledge and emulating positive preceptor traits, to guide the development of AI tools for medical education. View details Software development is a team sport Jie Chen Qiao Ma Alison Chang Rayven Plaza Marie Huber Claire Taylor IEEE Software (2025) Preview Preview abstract In this article, we describe our human-centered research focused on understanding the role of collaboration and teamwork in productive software development. We describe creation of a logs-based metric to identify collaboration through observable events and a survey-based multi-item scale to assess team functioning. View details Capturing Real-World Habitual Sleep Patterns with a Novel User-centric Algorithm to Pre-Process Fitbit Data in the All of Us Research Program: Retrospective observational longitudinal study Hiral Master Jeffrey Annis Jack Ching Karla Gleichauf Lide Han Peyton Coleman Kelsie Full Neil Zheng Doug Ruderfer John Hernandez Logan Schneider Evan Brittain Journal of Medical Internet Research (2025) Preview Preview abstract Background: Commercial wearables such as Fitbit quantify sleep metrics using fixed calendar times as default measurement periods, which may not adequately account for individual variations in sleep patterns. To address this limitation, experts in sleep medicine and wearable technology developed a user-centric algorithm designed to more accurately reflect actual sleep behaviors and improve the validity of wearable-derived sleep metrics. Objective: This study aims to describe the development of a new user-centric algorithm, compare its performance with the default calendar-relative algorithm, and provide a practical guide for analyzing All of Us Fitbit sleep data on a cloud-based platform. Methods: The default and user-centric algorithms were implemented to preprocess and compute sleep metrics related to schedule, duration, and disturbances using high-resolution Fitbit sleep data from 8563 participants (median age 58.1 years, 6002/8341, 71.96%, female) in the All of Us Research Program (version 7 Controlled Tier). Variations in typical sleep patterns were calculated by examining the differences in the mean number of primary sleep logs classified by each algorithm. Linear mixed-effects models were used to compare differences in sleep metrics across quartiles of variation in typical sleep patterns. Results: Out of 8,452,630 total sleep logs collected over a median of 4.2 years of Fitbit monitoring, 401,777 (4.75%) nonprimary sleep logs identified by the default algorithm were reclassified as primary sleep by the user-centric algorithm. Variation in typical sleep patterns ranged from –0.08 to 1. Among participants with the greatest variation in typical sleep patterns, the user-centric algorithm identified significantly more total sleep time (by 17.6 minutes; P View details Fast ACS: Low-Latency File-Based Ordered Message Delivery at Scale Sushant Kumar Gupta Anil Raghunath Iyer Neel Bagora Chang Yu Olivier Pomerleau Vivek Kumar Prunthaban Kanthakumar Usenix Annual Technical Conference (2025) Preview Preview abstract Low-latency message delivery is crucial for real-time systems. Data originating from a producer must be delivered to consumers, potentially distributed in clusters across metropolitan and continental boundaries. With the growing scale of computing, there can be several thousand consumers of the data. Such systems require a robust messaging system capable of transmitting messages containing data across clusters and efficiently delivering them to consumers. The system must offer guarantees like ordering and at-least-once delivery while avoiding overload on consumers, allowing them to consume messages at their own pace. This paper presents the design of Fast ACS (an abbreviation for Ads Copy Service), a file-based ordered message delivery system that leverages a combination of two-sided (inter-cluster) and one-sided (intra-cluster) communication primitives—namely, Remote Procedure Call and Remote Direct Memory Access, respectively—to deliver messages. The system has been successfully deployed to dozens of production clusters and scales to accommodate several thousand consumers within each cluster, which amounts to Tbps-scale intra-cluster consumer traffic at peak. Notably, Fast ACS delivers messages to consumers across the globe within a few seconds or even sub-seconds (p99) based on the message volume and consumer scale, at a low resource cost. View details How Unique is Whose Web Browser? The role of demographics in browser fingerprinting Alex Berke Enrico Bacis Badih Ghazi Pritish Kamath Ravi Kumar Robin Lassonde Pasin Manurangsi Umar Syed Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies 2025(1) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Web browser fingerprinting can be used to identify and track users across the Web, even without cookies, by collecting attributes from users' devices to create unique "fingerprints". This technique and resulting privacy risks have been studied for over a decade. Yet further research is limited because prior studies did not openly publish their data. Additionally, data in prior studies had biases and lacked user demographics. Here we publish a first-of-its-kind open dataset that includes browser attributes with users' demographics, collected from 8,400 US study participants, with their informed consent. Our data collection process also conducted an experiment to study what impacts users' likelihood to share browser data for open research, in order to inform future data collection efforts, with survey responses from a total of 12,461 participants. Female participants were significantly less likely to share their browser data, as were participants who were shown the browser data we asked to collect. In addition we demonstrate how fingerprinting risks differ across demographic groups. For example, we find lower income users are more at risk, and find that as users' age increases, they are both more likely to be concerned about fingerprinting and at real risk of fingerprinting. Furthermore, we demonstrate an overlooked risk: user demographics, such as gender, age, income level, ethnicity and race, can be inferred from browser attributes commonly used for fingerprinting, and we identify which browser attributes most contribute to this risk. Overall, we show the important role of user demographics in the ongoing work that intends to assess fingerprinting risks and improve user privacy, with findings to inform future privacy enhancing browser developments. The dataset and data collection tool we openly publish can be used to further study research questions not addressed in this work. View details Mix&Slice Enrico Bacis Marco Rosa Encyclopedia of Cryptography, Security and Privacy, Springer Nature Switzerland (2025), pp. 1550-1555 Preview Preview abstract Mix&Slice is an encryption technique that enables efficient and robust access revocation on resources stored at external cloud providers. The technique makes use of a transformation that provides strong inter-dependency in the encrypted representation of a resource. To perform access revocation, it is then sufficient to re-encrypt a small portion of the resource to have guarantees that the resource (and any of its parts) will become unintelligible to those from whom access has been revoked. View details Lower Bounds in Differentially Private Sublinear-time Algorithms Jeremiah M Blocki Hendrik Fichtenberger Elena Grigorescu Tamalika Mukherjee 2025 Preview FleetIO: Managing Multi-Tenant Cloud Storage with Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning Jinghan Sun Benjamin Reidys Daixuan Li Jichuan Chang Marc Snir Jian Huang 2025 Preview Preview abstract Cloud platforms have been virtualizing storage devices like flash-based solid-state drives (SSDs) to make effective use of storage resources. They enable either software-isolated instance or hardware-isolated instance for facilitating the storage sharing between multi-tenant applications. However, for decades, they have to combat the fundamental tussle between the performance isolation and resource utilization. They suffer from either long tail latency caused by weak isolation or low storage utilization caused by strong isolation. In this paper, we present FleetIO, a learning-based storage virtualization framework that employs reinforcement learning (RL) for managing virtualized SSDs. FleetIO explores the unique features of RL to handle the dynamic changes of application workloads and storage states, and integrates the storage scheduling into the RL decision-making process. It achieves both performance isolation and improved storage utilization by enabling dynamic fine-grained storage harvesting across co-located application instances, while minimizing its negative impact on their service-level objectives (SLOs). FleetIO clusters workloads into different types (e.g., latency-sensitive and bandwidth-intensive) based on the collected I/O traces at runtime, and fine-tunes the RL reward functions for each type of workloads. We implement FleetIO on a real programmable SSD board and evaluate it with diverse cloud applications. We show that FleetIO improves the overall storage utilization of the shared SSD by up to 1.4×, and decreases the tail latency of I/O requests by 1.5× on average, compared to the state-of-the-art storage sharing approaches. View details LLM-based Lossless Text Simplification and its Effect on User Comprehension and Cognitive Load Theo Guidroz Diego Ardila Jimmy Li Adam Mansour Paul Jhun Nina Gonzalez Xiang Ji Mike Sanchez Sujay Kakarmath Mathias Bellaiche Miguel Ángel Garrido Faruk Ahmed Divyansh Choudhary Jay Hartford Georgina Xu Henry Serrano Yifan Wang Jeff Shaffer Eric (Yifan) Cao Yossi Matias Avinatan Hassidim Dale Webster Yun Liu Sho Fujiwara Peggy Bui Quang Duong arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Information on the web, such as scientific publications and Wikipedia, often surpasses users' reading level. To help address this, we used a self-refinement approach to develop a LLM capability for minimally lossy text simplification. To validate our approach, we conducted a randomized study involving 4563 participants and 31 texts spanning 6 broad subject areas: PubMed (biomedical scientific articles), biology, law, finance, literature/philosophy, and aerospace/computer science. Participants were randomized to viewing original or simplified texts in a subject area, and answered multiple-choice questions (MCQs) that tested their comprehension of the text. The participants were also asked to provide qualitative feedback such as task difficulty. Our results indicate that participants who read the simplified text answered more MCQs correctly than their counterparts who read the original text (3.9% absolute increase, p View details Fast Tensor Completion via Approximate Richardson Iteration Mehrdad Ghadiri Matthew Fahrbach Yunbum Kook Ali Jadbabaie Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (2025), pp. 19248-19265 Preview Preview abstract We study tensor completion (TC) through the lens of low-rank tensor decomposition (TD). Many TD algorithms use fast alternating minimization methods, which solve highly structured linear regression problems at each step (e.g., for CP, Tucker, and tensor-train decompositions). However, such algebraic structure is lost in TC regression problems, making direct extensions unclear. To address this, we propose a lifting approach that approximately solves TC regression problems using structured TD regression algorithms as blackbox subroutines, enabling sublinear-time methods. We theoretically analyze the convergence rate of our approximate Richardson iteration based algorithm, and we demonstrate on real-world tensors that its running time can be 100x faster than direct methods for CP completion. View details 6 7 8 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
