 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 556 - 570 of 676 publications chip template Remove Gating is Weighting: Understanding Gated Linear Attention through In-context Learning Yingcong Li Maryam Fazel Ankit Singh Rawat Samet Oymak Davoud Ataee Tarzanagh Conference on Language Modeling (COLM) 2025 Preview Preview abstract Linear attention methods provide a strong alternative to softmax attention as they allow for efficient recurrent decoding. Recent research has focused on enhancing standard linear attention by incorporating gating while retaining its computational benefits. Such Gated Linear Attention (GLA) architectures include highly competitive models such as Mamba and RWKV. In this work, we examine the in-context learning capabilities of the GLA model and make the following contributions. We show that a multilayer GLA can implement a general class of Weighted Projected Gradient Descent (WPGD) algorithms with data-dependent weights. These weights are induced by the gating and allows the model to control the contribution of individual tokens to prediction. To further understand the mechanics of weighting, we introduce a novel data model with multitask prompts and characterize the optimization landscape of the problem of learning a WPGD algorithm. We identify mild conditions under which there is a unique (global) minimum up to scaling invariance, and the associated WPGD algorithm is unique as well. Finally, we translate these findings to explore the optimization landscape of GLA and shed light on how gating facilitates context-aware learning and when it is provably better than vanilla linear attention. View details Magic state cultivation on a superconducting quantum processor Emma Rosenfeld Craig Gidney Gabrielle Roberts Alexis Morvan Dvir Kafri Nathan Lacroix Alexandre Bourassa Kevin Satzinger arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Fault-tolerant quantum computing requires a universal gate set, but the necessary non-Clifford gates represent a significant resource cost for most quantum error correction architectures. Magic state cultivation offers an efficient alternative to resource-intensive distillation protocols; however, testing the proposal's assumptions represents a challenging departure from quantum memory experiments. We present an experimental study of magic state cultivation on a superconducting quantum processor. We implement cultivation, including code-switching into a surface code, and develop a fault-tolerant measurement protocol to bound the magic state fidelity. Cultivation reduces the error by a factor of 40, with a state fidelity of 0.9999(1) (retaining 8% of attempts). Our results experimentally establish magic state cultivation as a viable solution to one of quantum computing's most significant challenges. View details Synthesize Privacy-Preserving High-Resolution Images via Private Text Mediators Haoxiang Wang Zinan Lin Da Yu Huishuai Zhang 2025 Preview Preview abstract A new framework for generating high-resolution, differentially private (DP) synthetic images. The method summarizes each private image using image-to-text models, applies a modified Private Evolution algorithm to generate DP text, and then reconstructs images via text-to-image models. View details What Secrets Do Your Manifolds Hold? Understanding the Local Geometry of Generative Models Imtiaz Humayun Ibtihel Amara Cristina Vasconcelos Deepak Ramachandran Candice Schumann Junfeng He Katherine Heller Golnoosh Farnadi Negar Rostamzadeh Mohammad Havaei ICLR 2025 Preview Preview abstract Deep Generative Models are frequently used to learn continuous representations of complex data distributions by training on a finite number of samples. For any generative model, including pre-trained foundation models with Diffusion or Transformer architectures, generation performance can significantly vary across the learned data manifold. In this paper, we study the local geometry of the learned manifold and its relationship to generation outcomes for a wide range of generative models, including DDPM, Diffusion Transformer (DiT), and Stable Diffusion 1.4. Building on the theory of continuous piecewise-linear (CPWL) generators, we characterize the local geometry in terms of three geometric descriptors - scaling (ψ), rank (ν), and complexity/un-smoothness (δ). We provide quantitative and qualitative evidence showing that for a given latent vector, the local descriptors are indicative of post-generation aesthetics, generation diversity, and memorization by the generative model. Finally, we demonstrate that by training a reward model on the local scaling for Stable Diffusion, we can self-improve both generation aesthetics and diversity using geometry sensitive guidance during denoising. View details Racing Thoughts: Explaining Large Language Model Contextualization Errors Michael Lepori Mike Mozer Asma Ghandeharioun NAACL 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract The profound success of transformer-based language models can largely be attributed to their ability to integrate relevant contextual information from an input sequence in order to generate a response or complete a task. However, we know very little about the algorithms that a model employs to implement this capability, nor do we understand their failure modes. For example, given the prompt "John is going fishing, so he walks over to the bank. Can he make an ATM transaction?", a model may incorrectly respond "Yes" if it has not properly contextualized "bank" as a geographical feature, rather than a financial institution. We propose the LLM Race Conditions Hypothesis as an explanation of contextualization errors of this form. This hypothesis identifies dependencies between tokens (e.g., "bank" must be properly contextualized before the final token, "?", integrates information from "bank"), and claims that contextualization errors are a result of violating these dependencies. Using a variety of techniques from mechanistic intepretability, we provide correlational and causal evidence in support of the hypothesis, and suggest inference-time interventions to address it. View details Panel: Barriers to Implementation of Accessibility Research in Industry Practice – and Vice Versa Srishti Agrawal Cindy Bennett Amelia L Rua Williams (2025) Preview Preview abstract As public policy advances the rights of people with disabilities, and as corporations begin to recognize disabled people as core market segments, industry practice in accessible technology design and development improves day by day. Yet, as with other research domains there are lags and gaps in the implementation of accessibility between the lab and industry practice. In this panel, we describe multiple barriers to collaboration between academia and industry and how these barriers manifest as issues in implementation of research findings in industry and lack of adoption of best practices in academia, and vice versa. We then discuss how these specific cases complicate the imagined divide between academic and industry approaches to accessibility. How can notions of accessibility be expanded in both contexts to include overlooked dimensions like ethics, dark patterns, and cognition? This discussion moves towards more inclusive, impactful, and actionable accessibility practices across industry, academia, and public policy. View details Fantastic Copyrighted Beasts and How (Not) to Generate Them Lucy He Yangsibo Huang Weijia Shi Tinghao Xie Haotian Liu Yue Wang Luke Zettlemoyer Chiyuan Zhang Danqi Chen Peter Henderson International Conference on Learning Representations (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent studies show that image and video generation models can be prompted to reproduce copyrighted content from their training data, raising serious legal concerns about copyright infringement. Copyrighted characters (e.g., Mario, Batman) present a significant challenge: at least one lawsuit has already awarded damages based on the generation of such characters. Consequently, commercial services like DALL-E have started deploying interventions. However, little research has systematically examined these problems: (1) Can users easily prompt models to generate copyrighted characters, even if it is unintentional?; (2) How effective are the existing mitigation strategies? To address these questions, we introduce a novel evaluation framework with metrics that assess both the generated image's similarity to copyrighted characters and its consistency with user intent, grounded in a set of popular copyrighted characters from diverse studios and regions. We show that state-of-the-art image and video generation models can still generate characters even if characters' names are not explicitly mentioned, sometimes with only two generic keywords (e.g., prompting with "videogame, plumber" consistently generates Nintendo's Mario character). We also introduce semi-automatic techniques to identify such keywords or descriptions that trigger character generation. Using this framework, we evaluate mitigation strategies, including prompt rewriting and new approaches we propose. Our findings reveal that common methods, such as DALL-E's prompt rewriting, are insufficient alone and require supplementary strategies like negative prompting. Our work provides empirical grounding for discussions on copyright mitigation strategies and offers actionable insights for model deployers implementing these safeguards. View details Faster Cascades via Speculative Decoding Hari Narasimhan Sanjiv Kumar Ankit Singh Rawat Wittawat Jitkrittum Seungyeon Kim Neha Gupta Aditya Menon International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) 2025 Preview Preview abstract Cascades and speculative decoding are two common approaches to improving language models' inference efficiency. Both approaches involve interleaving models of different sizes, but via fundamentally distinct mechanisms: cascades employ a deferral rule that invokes the larger model only for "hard" inputs, while speculative decoding uses speculative execution to primarily invoke the larger model in parallel verification mode. These mechanisms offer different benefits: empirically, cascades are often capable of yielding better quality than even the larger model, while theoretically, speculative decoding offers a guarantee of quality-neutrality. In this paper, we leverage the best of both these approaches by designing new speculative cascading techniques that implement their deferral rule through speculative execution. We characterize the optimal deferral rule for our speculative cascades, and employ a plug-in approximation to the optimal rule. Through experiments with T5 and Gemma models on benchmark language tasks, we show that the proposed cascading approach matches the quality of a regular cascade, but at reduced inference costs. View details The vast world of quantum advantage Robert Huang Jarrod McClean John Preskill Soonwon Choi arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract The quest to identify quantum advantages, where quantum physics truly outperforms classical physics, lies at the heart of quantum technology. While quantum devices promise extraordinary capabilities, from exponential computational speedups to unprecedented measurement precision, distinguishing genuine advantages from mere illusions remains a formidable challenge. In this endeavor, quantum theorists are like prophets trying to foretell a future where quantum technologies reign supreme. Yet, the boundary between visionary insight and unfounded fantasy is perilously thin. In this perspective, we explore the properties defining an ideal quantum advantage and examine our mathematical tools for navigating the vast world of quantum advantages across computation, learning, sensing, communication, and beyond. We show that some quantum advantages are inherently unpredictable using classical resources alone, suggesting a landscape far richer than what we can currently foresee. While mathematical rigor remains our indispensable guide in this exploration, the ultimate power of quantum technologies may emerge from the quantum advantages we cannot yet conceive. View details RMBoost: Reward Model Training With Preference-Conditional Multi-Aspect Synthetic Data Generation Zhen Qin Yennie Jun Tianqi Liu Carl Yang Simon Baumgartner Michael Bendersky Ethan Liang Jiaming Shen Ran Xu 2025 Preview Preview abstract Reward models (RMs) are crucial for aligning large language models (LLMs) with human preferences. They are trained using preference datasets where each example consists of one input prompt, two responses, and a preference label. As curating a high-quality human labeled preference dataset is both time-consuming and expensive, people often rely on existing powerful LLMs for preference label generation. This can potentially introduce noise and impede RM training. In this work, we present RMBoost, a novel synthetic preference data generation paradigm to boost reward model quality. The core idea of RMBoost is to first select a preference label and then directly generates the second more (or less) preferred response conditioned this preference label. Compared to traditional approaches where we first generate two responses and then obtain the preference label, RMBoost has two main advantages. First, RMBoost reduces labeling noise since preference pairs are constructed intentionally. Second, RMBoost allows for the creation of more diverse responses by incorporating various quality aspects (e.g., helpfulness, relevance, completeness) into the prompts We conduct extensive experiments on three diverse datasets and demonstrate that RMBoost outperforms other synthetic preference data generation techniques and significantly boosts the performance of five distinct reward models. View details The Power of Context: How Multimodality Improves Image Super-Resolution Kangfu Mei Hossein Talebi Mojtaba Ardakani Vishal M Patel Peyman Milanfar Mauricio Delbracio 2025 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) Preview Preview abstract Single-image super-resolution (SISR) remains challenging due to the inherent difficulty of recovering fine-grained details and preserving perceptual quality from low-resolution inputs. Existing methods often rely on limited image priors, leading to suboptimal results. We propose a novel approach that leverages the rich contextual information available in multiple modalities –including depth, segmentation, edges, and text prompts– to learn a powerful generative prior for SISR within a diffusion model framework. We introduce a flexible network architecture that effectively fuses multimodal information, accommodating an arbitrary number of input modalities without requiring significant modifications to the diffusion process. Crucially, we mitigate hallucinations, often introduced by text prompts, by using spatial information from other modalities to guide regional text-based conditioning. Each modality’s guidance strength can also be controlled independently, allowing steering outputs toward different directions, such as increasing bokeh through depth or adjusting object prominence via segmentation. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our model surpasses state-of-the-art generative SISR methods, achieving superior visual quality and fidelity. View details The Cost of Consistency: Submodular Maximization with Constant Recourse Paul Duetting Federico Fusco Morteza Zadimoghaddam Ashkan Norouzi Fard Silvio Lattanzi Ola Svensson ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC 2025), ACM, pp. 1406-1417 Preview Preview abstract In this work, we study online submodular maximization and how the requirement of maintaining a stable solution impacts the approximation. In particular, we seek bounds on the best-possible approximation ratio that is attainable when the algorithm is allowed to make, at most, a constant number of updates per step. We show a tight information-theoretic bound of $2/3$ for general monotone submodular functions and an improved (also tight) bound of $3/4$ for coverage functions. Since both these bounds are attained by non poly-time algorithms, we also give a poly-time randomized algorithm that achieves a $0.51$-approximation. Combined with an information-theoretic hardness of $1/2$ for deterministic algorithms from prior work, our work thus shows a separation between deterministic and randomized algorithms, both information theoretically and for poly-time algorithms. View details Mitigating Over-Exploration in Latent Space Optimization using LES Omer Ronen Imtiaz Humayun Richard G. Baraniuk Randall Balestriero Bin Yu ICML 2025 Preview Preview abstract We develop Latent Exploration Score (LES) to mitigate over-exploration in Latent Space Optimization (LSO), a popular method for solving black-box discrete optimization problems. LSO utilizes continuous optimization within the latent space of a Variational Autoencoder (VAE) and is known to be susceptible to overexploration, which manifests in unrealistic solutions that reduce its practicality. LES leverages the trained decoder’s approximation of the data distribution, and can be employed with any VAE decoder–including pretrained ones–without additional training, architectural changes or access to the training data. Our evaluation across five LSO benchmark tasks and twenty-two VAE models demonstrates that LES always enhances the quality of the solutions while maintaining high objective values, leading to improvements over existing solutions in most cases. We believe that new avenues to LSO will be opened by LES’ ability to identify out of distribution areas, differentiability, and computational tractability. View details Faster Margin Maximization Rates for Generic and Adversarially Robust Optimization Methods Guanghui Wang Zihao Hu Claudio Gentile Vidya Muthukumar Jake Abernethy Mathematical Programming (2025) Preview Preview abstract First-order optimization methods tend to inherently favor certain solutions over others when minimizing an underdetermined training objective that has multiple global optima. This phenomenon, known as implicit bias, plays a critical role in understanding the generalization capabilities of optimization algorithms. Recent research has revealed that in separable binary classification tasks gradient-descent-based methods exhibit an implicit bias for the L2-maximal margin classifier. Similarly, generic optimization methods, such as mirror descent and steepest descent, have been shown to converge to maximal margin classifiers defined by alternative geometries. While gradient-descent-based algorithms provably achieve fast implicit bias rates, corresponding rates in the literature for generic optimization methods are relatively slow. To address this limitation, we present a series of state-of-the-art implicit bias rates for mirror descent and steepest descent algorithms. Our primary technique involves transforming a generic optimization algorithm into an online optimization dynamic that solves a regularized bilinear game, providing a unified framework for analyzing the implicit bias of various optimization methods. Our accelerated rates are derived by leveraging the regret bounds of online learning algorithms within this game framework. We then show the flexibility of this framework by analyzing the implicit bias in adversarial training, and again obtain significantly improved convergence rates. View details Practical Inverse Rendering of Textured and Translucent Appearance Philippe Weier Jérémy Riviere Ruslan Guseinov Stephan Garbin Philipp Slusallek Bernd Bickel Thabo Beeler Delio Vicini ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 44 (2025), pp. 1-16 Preview Preview abstract Inverse rendering has emerged as a standard tool to reconstruct the parameters of appearance models from images (e.g., textured BSDFs). In this work, we present several novel contributions motivated by the practical challenges of recovering high-resolution surface appearance textures, including spatially-varying subsurface scattering parameters. First, we propose Laplacian mipmapping, which combines differentiable mipmapping and a Laplacian pyramid representation into an effective preconditioner. This seemingly simple technique significantly improves the quality of recovered surface textures on a set of challenging inverse rendering problems. Our method automatically adapts to the render and texture resolutions, only incurs moderate computational cost and achieves better quality than prior work while using fewer hyperparameters. Second, we introduce a specialized gradient computation algorithm for textured, path-traced subsurface scattering, which facilitates faithful reconstruction of translucent materials. By using path tracing, we enable the recovery of complex appearance while avoiding the approximations of the previously used diffusion dipole methods. Third, we demonstrate the application of both these techniques to reconstructing the textured appearance of human faces from sparse captures. Our method recovers high-quality relightable appearance parameters that are compatible with current production renderers. View details 38 39 40 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
