 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 226 - 240 of 676 publications chip template Remove Safe Coding: Rigorous Modular Reasoning about Software Safety (Extended Version) Christoph Kern Google Security Engineering (2025) Preview Preview abstract Many persistent and dangerous software vulnerabilities, including memory safety violations and code injection, arise from a common root cause: Developers inadvertently violate the implicit safety preconditions of widely-used programming constructs. These preconditions—such as pointer validity, array-access bounds, and the trustworthy provenance of code fragments to be evaluated as SQL, HTML, or JavaScript—are traditionally the developer's responsibility to ensure. In complex systems, meeting these obligations often relies on non-local, whole-program invariants that are notoriously difficult to reason about correctly, leading to vulnerabilities that are difficult to detect after the fact. This article introduces Safe Coding, a collection of software design patterns and practices designed to cost-effectively provide a high degree of assurance against entire classes of such vulnerabilities. The core principle of Safe Coding is to shift responsibility for safety from individual developers to the programming language, software libraries, and frameworks. This is achieved by systematically eliminating the direct use of risky operations—those with complex safety preconditions—in application code. Instead, these operations are encapsulated within safe abstractions: modules with public APIs that are safe by design, whose implementations fully ensure all module-internal safety preconditions through a combination of local runtime checks and by elevating safety preconditions into type invariants. Safe Coding facilitates a modular and compositional approach to whole-program safety: Difficult reasoning is localized to the implementation of safe abstractions, which undergo focused expert scrutiny. The composition of these abstractions with the majority of the codebase (which is kept free of risky operations) is then automatically verified by the language’s type checker. This form of compositional reasoning, drawing from patterns used in formal software verification, can be viewed as a semi-formal approach that balances rigor with broad applicability to large industrial codebases. We discuss the successful application of these practices at Google, where they have nearly eliminated vulnerabilities such as Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) and SQL injection, and their critical role in ensuring memory safety in Rust, collectively demonstrating a favorable cost-assurance tradeoff for achieving software safety at scale. This extended version explores the formal underpinnings of Safe Coding in detail, examining how concepts such as function contracts and modular proofs are pragmatically adapted for industrial-scale use. View details DS-STAR: Data Science Agent via Iterative Planning and Verification Tomas Pfister Jiefeng Chen Jaehyun Nam Jinsung Yoon 2025 Preview Preview abstract Data science, which transforms raw data into actionable insights, is critical for data-driven decision-making. However, these tasks are often complex, involving steps like exploring multiple data sources and synthesizing findings to deliver clear answers. While large language model (LLM) agents show significant promise in automating this process, they often struggle with heterogeneous data formats and generate sub-optimal analysis plans, as verifying plan correctness is inherently difficult without ground-truth labels for such open-ended tasks. To overcome these limitations, we introduce DS-STAR, a novel data science agent. Specifically, DS-STAR makes three key contributions: (1) a data file analysis module that automatically reads and extracts context from diverse data formats, including unstructured types; (2) a verification step where an LLM-based judge evaluates the sufficiency of the analysis plan at each stage; and (3) a sequential planning mechanism that starts with a simple, executable plan and iteratively refines it based the DS-STAR's feedback until its sufficiency is confirmed. This iterative refinement allows DS-STAR to reliably navigate complex analyses involving varied data sources. Our experiments show that DS-STAR achieves state-of-the-art performance, improving accuracy on the challenging DABStep benchmark from 41.0% to 45.2% and on Kramabench from 31.3% to 44.7%. These results demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach for practical, multi-step data science tasks. View details The Complexity of Misinformation Extends Beyond Simple Virus and Warfare Analogies Lena Frischlich Henrik Olsson Abhishek Roy Heidi Schulze Stan Rhodes Alison Mansheim NPJ Complexity (2025) Preview Preview abstract Debates about misinformation and countermeasures are often driven by dramatic analogies, such as “infodemic” or “information warfare”. While useful shortcuts to interference, these analogies obscure the complex system through which misinformation propagates, leaving blind spots where solutions lie unseen. We present a new framework of the complex multilevel system through which misinformation propagates and show how popular analogies fail to account for this complexity. This approach offers an integrative multilevel framework for future work. View details Software Managed Networks via Coarsening Pradeep Dogga Rachee Singh Suman Nath Ravi Netravali Jens Palsberg George Varghese 2025 Preview Preview abstract We propose moving from Software Defined Networks (SDN) to Software Managed Networks (SMN) where all information for managing the life cycle of a network (from deployment to operations to upgrades), across all layers (from Layer 1 through 7) is stored in a central repository. Crucially, a SMN also has a generalized control plane that, unlike SDN, controls all aspects of the cloud including traffic management (e.g., capacity planning) and reliability (e.g., incident routing) at both short (minutes) and large (years) time scales. Just as SDN allows better routing, a SMN improves visibility and enables cross-layer optimizations for faster response to failures and better network planning and operations. Implemented naively, SMN for planetary scale networks requires orders of magnitude larger and more heterogeneous data (e.g., alerts, logs) than SDN. We address this using coarsening - mapping complex data to a more compact abstract representation that has approximately the same effect, and is more scalable, maintainable, and learnable. We show examples including Coarse Bandwidth Logs for capacity planning and Coarse Dependency Graphs for incident routing. Coarse Dependency Graphs improve an incident routing metric from 45% to 78% while for a distributed approach like Scouts the same metric was 22%. We end by discussing how to realize SMN, and suggest cross-layer optimizations and coarsenings for other operational and planning problems in networks. View details FreshBrew: A Benchmark for Evaluating AI Agents on Java Code Migration Victor May Diganta Misra Yanqi Luo Anjali Sridhar Justine Gehring Silvio Soares Ribeiro Junior 2025 Preview Preview abstract AI coding assistants are rapidly becoming integral to modern software development. A key challenge in this space is the continual need to migrate and modernize codebases in response to evolving software ecosystems. Traditionally, such migrations have relied on rule-based systems and human intervention. With the advent of powerful large language models (LLMs), AI-driven agentic frameworks offer a promising alternative-but their effectiveness has not been systematically evaluated. In this paper, we introduce FreshBrew, a novel benchmark for evaluating AI agents on project-level Java migrations, with a specific focus on measuring an agent's ability to preserve program semantics and avoid reward hacking, which we argue requires projects with high test coverage for a rigorous and reliable evaluation. We benchmark several state-of-the-art LLMs, and compare their performance against established rule-based tools. Our evaluation of AI agents on this benchmark of 228 repositories shows that the top-performing model, Gemini 2.5 Flash, can successfully migrate 52.3 percent of projects to JDK 17. Our empirical analysis reveals novel insights into the critical strengths and limitations of current agentic approaches, offering actionable insights into their real-world applicability. Our empirical study reveals failure modes of current AI agents in realistic Java modernization tasks, providing a foundation for evaluating trustworthy code-migration systems. By releasing FreshBrew, we aim to facilitate rigorous, reproducible evaluation and catalyze progress in AI-driven codebase modernization. View details In-context finetuning for time-series foundation models Matthew Faw Rajat Sen Yichen Zhou Abhimanyu Das 2025 Preview Preview abstract We pioneer the study of in-context training for time-series foundation models. We create finetuning examples that not only include the usual (context, horizon) pairs for forecasting; but also related time-series examples in-context. We finetune a pretrained time-series foundation model on the type of in-context examples mentioned above. Our training is decoder-only and can adapt not only to any context, horizon pair (up to a certain maximum context) but also to any number of supplementary time-series examples (again up to a certain maximum number of examples). Appropriately trained models can then learn to borrow patterns from these related examples to do better on the original forecasting task. We show that this opens up interesting features like the ability to prompt the time-series foundation model with different related examples. This can help the finetuned model to adapt to specific features of a dataset at inference time. We show that such adaptions can lead to better zero-shot performance on popular forecasting benchmarks as compared to supervised deep learning methods, statistical models as well as other time-series foundation models. View details Quantum Simulation of Chemistry via Quantum Fast Multipole Transform Dominic Berry Kianna Wan Andrew Baczewski Elliot Eklund Arkin Tikku Ryan Babbush arXiv:2510.07380 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Here we describe an approach for simulating quantum chemistry on quantum computers with significantly lower asymptotic complexity than prior work. The approach uses a real-space first-quantised representation of the molecular Hamiltonian which we propagate using high-order product formulae. Essential for this low complexity is the use of a technique similar to the fast multipole method for computing the Coulomb operator with $\widetilde{\cal O}(\eta)$ complexity for a simulation with $\eta$ particles. We show how to modify this algorithm so that it can be implemented on a quantum computer. We ultimately demonstrate an approach with $t(\eta^{4/3}N^{1/3} + \eta^{1/3} N^{2/3} ) (\eta Nt/\epsilon)^{o(1)}$ gate complexity, where $N$ is the number of grid points, $\epsilon$ is target precision, and $t$ is the duration of time evolution. This is roughly a speedup by ${\cal O}(\eta)$ over most prior algorithms. We provide lower complexity than all prior work for $N \eta^6$. However, we expect the algorithm to have large constant factors that are likely to limit its practical applicability. View details Invisible Labor in Open Source Software Ecosystems John Meluso Amanda Casari Katie McLaughlin Milo Trujillo 2025 Preview Preview abstract Invisible labor is work that is either not fully visible or not appropriately compensated. In open source software (OSS) ecosystems, essential tasks that do not involve code (like content moderation) often become invisible to the detriment of individuals and organizations. However, invisible labor is sufficiently difficult to measure that we do not know how much of OSS activities are invisible. Our study addresses this challenge, demonstrating that roughly half of OSS work is invisible. We do this by developing a cognitive anchoring survey technique that measures OSS developer self-assessments of labor visibility and attribution. Survey respondents (n=142) reported that their work is more likely to be invisible (2 in 3 tasks) than visible, and that half (50.1%) is uncompensated. Priming participants with the idea of visibility caused participants to think their work was more visible, and that visibility was less important, than those primed with invisibility. We also found evidence that tensions between attribution motivations probably increase how common invisible labor is. This suggests that advertising OSS activities as "open" may lead contributors to overestimate how visible their labor actually is. Our findings suggest benefits to working with varied stakeholders to make select, collectively valued activities visible, and increasing compensation in valued forms (like attribution, opportunities, or pay) when possible. This could improve fairness in software development while providing greater transparency into work designs that help organizations and communities achieve their goals. View details Fast and Effective GNN Training through Sequences of Random Path Graphs Fabio Vitale Francesco Paolo Nerini Claudio Gentile Andre Panisson Francesco Bonchi 2025 Preview Preview abstract We present a novel scalable framework for training GNNs in node classification tasks, based on effective resistance, a standard tool in spectral graph theory. Unlike other spectral and graph modification approaches to GNN training, our method progressively refines the GNN weights on a sequence of random spanning trees suitably transformed into path graphs which, despite their simplicity, are shown to retain essential topological and node information of the original input graph. The sparse nature of these path graphs substantially lightens the computational burden of GNN training. This not only enhances scalability but also improves accuracy in subsequent test phases. In particular, we focus on small training set regimes, which are of great practical importance, since in many real-world scenarios labels may be challenging to obtain. We show that our framework yields very good empirical results because it effectively counters the training deterioration caused by overfitting when the training set is small. Moreover, we successfully address common issues like over-squashing and over-smoothing while, at the same time, avoiding under-reaching phenomena. Although our framework is flexible and can be deployed in several types of GNNs, in this paper we focus on graph convolutional networks and carry out an extensive experimental investigation on a number of real-world graph benchmarks, where we achieve simultaneous improvement of training speed and test accuracy over a wide pool of representative baselines. View details Verifiable Quantum Advantage via Optimized DQI Circuits Tanuj Khattar Noah Shutty Craig Gidney Adam Zalcman Nour Yosri Dmitri Maslov Ryan Babbush Stephen Jordan arXiv:2510.10967 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Decoded Quantum Interferometry (DQI) provides a framework for superpolynomial quantum speedups by reducing certain optimization problems to reversible decoding tasks. We apply DQI to the Optimal Polynomial Intersection (OPI) problem, whose dual code is Reed-Solomon (RS). We establish that DQI for OPI is the first known candidate for verifiable quantum advantage with optimal asymptotic speedup: solving instances with classical hardness $O(2^N)$ requires only $\widetilde{O}(N)$ quantum gates, matching the theoretical lower bound. Realizing this speedup requires highly efficient reversible RS decoders. We introduce novel quantum circuits for the Extended Euclidean Algorithm, the decoder's bottleneck. Our techniques, including a new representation for implicit Bézout coefficient access, and optimized in-place architectures, reduce the leading-order space complexity to the theoretical minimum of $2nb$ qubits while significantly lowering gate counts. These improvements are broadly applicable, including to Shor's algorithm for the discrete logarithm. We analyze OPI over binary extension fields $GF(2^b)$, assess hardness against new classical attacks, and identify resilient instances. Our resource estimates show that classically intractable OPI instances (requiring $>10^{23}$ classical trials) can be solved with approximately 5.72 million Toffoli gates. This is substantially less than the count required for breaking RSA-2048, positioning DQI as a compelling candidate for practical, verifiable quantum advantage. View details Envisioning Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander AI Futures Ben Hutchinson Journal of Global Indigeneity (2025) Preview Preview abstract In January 2025, over forty Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander researchers, practitioners, community members, and allies, gathered at the Centre for Global Indigenous Futures at the Wallumattagal Campus of Macquarie University in Sydney to envisage Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander AI futures. This publication reports on attendees' vision for the future of AI for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. View details ReviewCoin: Paying for Real Work Chris Welty arXiv, Google Research (2025) Preview Preview abstract The peer-review process is broken and the problem is getting worse, especially in AI: large conferences like NeurIPS increasingly struggle to adequately review huge numbers of paper submissions. I propose a scalable solution that, foremost, recognizes reviewing as important, necessary, \emph{work} and rewards it with crypto-coins owned and managed by the conferences themselves. The idea is at its core quite simple: paper submissions require work (reviews, meta-reviews, etc.) to be done, and therefore the submitter must pay for that work. Each reviewer submits their review to be approved by some designated conference officer (e.g. PC chair, Area Chair, etc.), and upon approval is paid a single coin for a single review. If three reviews are required, the cost of submission should be three coins + a tax that covers payments to all the volunteers who organize the conference. After some one-time startup costs to fairly distribute coins, the process should be relatively stable with new coins minted only when a conference grows. View details Tighter Privacy Analysis for Truncated Poisson Sampling Arun Ganesh (2025) Preview Preview abstract We give a new privacy amplification analysis for truncated Poisson sampling, a Poisson sampling variant that truncates a batch if it exceeds a given maximum batch size. View details Differential Privacy on Trust Graphs Badih Ghazi Ravi Kumar Pasin Manurangsi Serena Wang ITCS (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study differential privacy (DP) in a multi-party setting where each party only trusts a (known) subset of the other parties with its data. Specifically, given a trust graph where vertices correspond to parties and neighbors are mutually trusting, we give a DP algorithm for aggregation with a much better privacy-utility trade-off than in the well-studied local model of DP (where each party trusts no other party). We further study a robust variant where each party trusts all but an unknown subset of at most t of its neighbors (where t is a given parameter), and give an algorithm for this setting. We complement our algorithms with lower bounds, and discuss implications of our work to other tasks in private learning and analytics. View details Understanding challenges to the validity of disaggregated evaluations for algorithmic fairness Stephen Pfohl Natalie Harris Chirag Nagpal David Madras Vishwali Mhasawade Olawale Salaudeen Awa Dieng Shannon Sequeira Santiago Arciniegas Lillian Sung Nnamdi Ezeanochie Heather Cole-Lewis Katherine Heller Sanmi Koyejo Alexander D'Amour Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Disaggregated evaluation across subgroups is critical for assessing the fairness of machine learning models, but its uncritical use can mislead practitioners. We show that equal performance across subgroups is an unreliable measure of fairness when data are representative of the relevant populations but reflective of real-world disparities. Furthermore, when data are not representative due to selection bias, both disaggregated evaluation and alternative approaches based on conditional independence testing may be invalid without explicit assumptions regarding the bias mechanism. We use causal graphical models to characterize fairness properties and metric stability across subgroups under different data generating processes. Our framework suggests complementing disaggregated evaluations with explicit causal assumptions and analysis to control for confounding and distribution shift, including conditional independence testing and weighted performance estimation. These findings have broad implications for how practitioners design and interpret model assessments given the ubiquity of disaggregated evaluation. View details 16 17 18 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
