 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 391 - 405 of 676 publications chip template Remove Contextual Dynamic Pricing with Heterogeneous Buyers Julian Zimmert Chara Podimata Princewill Okorafor Thodoris Lykouris Sloan Nietert 2025 Preview Preview abstract We initiate the study of contextual dynamic pricing with a heterogeneous population of buyers, where a seller repeatedly (over T rounds) posts prices that depend on the observable dimensional context and receives binary purchase feedback. Unlike prior work assuming homogeneous buyer types, in our setting the buyer's valuation type is drawn from an unknown distribution with finite support K*. We develop a contextual pricing algorithm based on Optimistic Posterior Sampling with regret K* sqrt(dT), which we prove to be tight in d, T up to logarithmic terms. Finally, we refine our analysis for the non-contextual pricing case, proposing a variance-aware Zooming algorithm that achieves the optimal dependence on K*. . View details Envisioning Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander AI Futures Ben Hutchinson Journal of Global Indigeneity (2025) Preview Preview abstract In January 2025, over forty Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander researchers, practitioners, community members, and allies, gathered at the Centre for Global Indigenous Futures at the Wallumattagal Campus of Macquarie University in Sydney to envisage Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander AI futures. This publication reports on attendees' vision for the future of AI for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. View details Learning by solving differential equations Benoit Dherin Michael Munn Hanna Mazzawi Michael Wunder Sourabh Medapati Xavi Gonzalvo 2025 Preview Preview abstract Modern deep learning algorithms use variations of gradient descent as their main learning methods. Gradient descent can be understood as the simplest Ordinary Differential Equation (ODE) solver; namely, the Euler method applied to the gradient flow differential equation. Since Euler, many ODE solvers have been devised that follow the gradient flow equation more precisely and more stably. Runge-Kutta (RK) methods provide a family of very powerful explicit and implicit high-order ODE solvers. However, these higher-order solvers have not found wide application in deep learning so far. In this work, we evaluate the performance of higher-order RK solvers when applied in deep learning, study their limitations, and propose ways to overcome these drawbacks. In particular, we explore how to improve their performance by naturally incorporating key ingredients of modern neural network optimizers such as preconditioning, adaptive learning rates, and momentum. View details Lower bounding the MaxCut of regular graphs at large girth using the QAOA Edward Farhi Sam Gutmann Daniel Ranard Benjamin Villalonga arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study MaxCut on 3-regular graphs of minimum girth $g$ for various $g$'s. We obtain new lower bounds on the maximum cut achievable in such graphs by analyzing the Quantum Approximate Optimization Algorithm (QAOA). For $g\geq14$, at depth $p \geq6$, the QAOA improves on previously known lower bounds. The bounds are established through classical numerical analysis of the QAOA's expected performance. This analysis does not produce the actual cuts but establishes their existence. When implemented on a quantum computer, the QAOA provides an efficient algorithm for finding such cuts, using a constant-depth quantum circuit. To our knowledge, this gives an exponential speedup over the best known classical algorithm guaranteed to achieve cuts of this size on graphs of this girth. We also apply the QAOA to the Maximum Independent Set problem on the same class of graphs. View details High-Dimensional Calibration from Swap Regret Maxwell Fishelson Noah Golowich Mehryar Mohri Jon Schneider 2025 Preview Preview abstract We present new efficient algorithms for high-dimensional calibration via reduction to the TreeSwap algorithm of Dagan et al. View details Consensus or Conflict? Fine-Grained Evaluation of Conflicting Answers in Question-Answering Eviatar Nachshoni Arie Cattan Shmuel Amar Ori Shapira Ido Dagan 2025 Preview Preview abstract Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated strong performance in question answering (QA) tasks. However, Multi-Answer Question Answering (MAQA), where a question may have several valid answers, remains challenging. Traditional QA settings often assume consistency across evidences, but MAQA can involve conflicting answers. Constructing datasets that reflect such conflicts is costly and labor-intensive, while existing benchmarks often rely on synthetic data, restrict the task to yes/no questions, or apply unverified automated annotation. To advance research in this area, we extend the conflict-aware MAQA setting to require models not only to identify all valid answers, but also to detect specific conflicting answer pairs, if any. To support this task, we introduce a novel cost-effective methodology for leveraging fact-checking datasets to construct NATCONFQA, a new benchmark for realistic, conflict-aware MAQA, enriched with detailed conflict labels, for all answer pairs. We evaluate eight high-end LLMs on NATCONFQA, revealing their fragility in handling various types of conflicts and the flawed strategies they employ to resolve them. View details Massive Sound Embedding Benchmark (MSEB) Cyril Allauzen Georg Heigold Ji Ma Ehsan Variani Michael Riley Tom Bagby 2025 Preview Preview abstract Although sound information extraction appear distinct across spectrum of sound classes and technologies, all inherently involve creating some form of "embedding"—be it discrete as in textual tokens or continuous vectors—to encapsulate relevant information from the audio signal for downstream utilization. This unifying framework allows us to re-evaluate sound information extraction by researching the optimality of current task-specific representations, the quality headroom and the potential for a single, robust sound embedding to generalize across diverse applications and sound types. To expedite research in these directions, a standardized evaluation benchmark is indispensable, mirroring the established benchmarks in text and image domains. We present the Massive Sound Embedding Benchmark (MSEB) to serve this purpose. MSEB encompasses realistic tasks and datasets that reflect practical applications across diverse technologies and sound categories. Initial experimental findings indicate substantial headroom for enhancing prevalent information extraction methodologies. We encourage the sound processing community to contribute data and tasks to MSEB and employ it to assess their algorithms for improved overall sound encoding. View details Contextual Dynamic Pricing with Heterogeneous Buyers Thodoris Lykouris Sloan Nietert Princewill Okorafor Chara Podimata Julian Zimmert 2025 Preview Preview abstract We initiate the study of contextual dynamic pricing with a heterogeneous population of buyers, where a seller repeatedly (over T rounds) posts prices that depend on the observable dimensional context and receives binary purchase feedback. Unlike prior work assuming homogeneous buyer types, in our setting the buyer's valuation type is drawn from an unknown distribution with finite support K*. We develop a contextual pricing algorithm based on Optimistic Posterior Sampling with regret K* sqrt(dT), which we prove to be tight in d, T up to logarithmic terms. Finally, we refine our analysis for the non-contextual pricing case, proposing a variance-aware Zooming algorithm that achieves the optimal dependence on K*. View details Multi-Agent Combinatorial Contracts Paul Duetting Tomer Ezra Michal Feldman Thomas Kesselheim Proceedings of the 2025 Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA 2025), pp. 1857 - 1891 Preview Preview abstract Combinatorial contracts are emerging as a key paradigm in algorithmic contract design, paralleling the role of combinatorial auctions in algorithmic mechanism design. In this paper we study natural combinatorial contract settings involving teams of agents, each capable of performing multiple actions. This scenario extends two fundamental special cases previously examined in the literature, namely the single-agent combinatorial action model of [Duetting et al., 2021] and the multi-agent binary-action model of [Babaioff et al., 2012, Duetting et al., 2023]. We study the algorithmic and computational aspects of these settings, highlighting the unique challenges posed by the absence of certain monotonicity properties essential for analyzing the previous special cases. To navigate these complexities, we introduce a broad set of novel tools that deepen our understanding of combinatorial contracts environments and yield good approximation guarantees. Our main result is a constant-factor approximation for submodular multi-agent multi-action problems with value and demand oracles access. This result is tight: we show that this problem admits no PTAS (even under binary actions). As a side product of our main result, we devise an FPTAS, with value and demand oracles, for single-agent combinatorial action scenarios with general reward functions, which is of independent interest. We also provide bounds on the gap between the optimal welfare and the principal's utility. We show that, for subadditive rewards, perhaps surprisingly, this gap scales only logarithmically (rather than linearly) in the size of the action space. View details Pragmatic Fairness: Evaluating ML Fairness Within the Constraints of Industry Jessie Smith Michael Madaio Robin Burke Casey Fiesler 2025 Preview Preview abstract Machine learning (ML) fairness evaluation in real-world, industry settings presents unique challenges due to business-driven constraints that influence decision-making processes. While prior research has proposed fairness frameworks and evaluation methodologies, these approaches often focus on idealized conditions and may lack consideration for the practical realities faced by industry practitioners. To understand these practical realities, we conducted a semi-structured interview study with 21 experts from academia and industry specializing in ML fairness. Through this study, we explore three constraints of ML fairness evaluation in industry— balancing competing interests, lacking power/access, and getting buy-in—and how these constraints lead to satisficing, seeking satisfactory rather than ideal outcomes. We define the path from these constraints to satisficing as pragmatic fairness. Using recommender systems as a case study, we explore how practitioners navigate these constraints and highlight actionable strategies to improve fairness evaluations within these business-minded boundaries. This paper provides practical insights to guide fairness evaluations in industry while also showcasing how the FAccT community can better align research goals with the operational realities of practitioners. View details Correspondance: Wearing a Fur Coat in the Summertime: Should Digital Pathology Redefine Medical Imaging? Kenneth Philbrick Brian Napora John Groth Mustafa Yousuf Journal of Pathology Informatics (2025) Preview Preview abstract In response to recent critiques, members of DICOM Working Group 26 assert that DICOM is the robust and essential standard for digital pathology, actively facilitating interoperability and communication of medical images far beyond simple pixel data. They highlight successful global deployments and collaborations (like the recent Connectathon) demonstrating DICOM's proven ability to integrate WSI scanners, archives, viewers, and AI tools. Despite concerns, DICOM offers flexible metadata encoding, robust security features, and strong industry and regulatory support, making it indispensable for patient care. The authors advocate for continued investment in and adoption of DICOM to advance efficiency, accuracy, and patient safety in integrated healthcare systems. View details The Pseudo-Dimension of Contracts Paul Duetting Michal Feldman Tomasz Ponitka Ermis Soumalis EC '25: Proceedings of the 26th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (2025), 514 - 539 Preview Preview abstract Algorithmic contract design studies scenarios where a principal incentivizes an agent to exert effort on her behalf. In this work, we focus on settings where the agent's type is drawn from an unknown distribution, and formalize an offline learning framework for learning near-optimal contracts from sample agent types. A central tool in our analysis is the notion of pseudo-dimension from statistical learning theory. Beyond its role in establishing upper bounds on the sample complexity, pseudo-dimension measures the intrinsic complexity of a class of contracts, offering a new perspective on the tradeoffs between simplicity and optimality in contract design. Our main results provide essentially optimal tradeoffs between pseudo-dimension and representation error (defined as the loss in principal's utility) with respect to linear and bounded contracts. Using these tradeoffs, we derive sample- and time-efficient learning algorithms, and demonstrate their near-optimality by providing almost matching lower bounds on the sample complexity. Conversely, for unbounded contracts, we prove an impossibility result showing that no learning algorithm exists. Finally, we extend our techniques in three important ways. First, we provide refined pseudo-dimension and sample complexity guarantees for the combinatorial actions model, revealing a novel connection between the number of critical values and sample complexity. Second, we extend our results to menus of contracts, showing that their pseudo-dimension scales linearly with the menu size. Third, we adapt our algorithms to the online learning setting, where we show that, a polynomial number of type samples suffice to learn near-optimal bounded contracts. Combined with prior work, this establishes a formal separation between expert advice and bandit feedback for this setting. View details (D)RAGged Into a Conflict: Detecting and Addressing Conflicting Sources in Retrieval-Augmented LLMs Arie Cattan Alon Jacovi Ori Ram Jonathan Herzig Roee Aharoni Sasha Goldshtein Eran Ofek Idan Szpektor Avi Caciularu 2025 Preview Preview abstract Retrieval Augmented Generation (RAG) is a commonly used approach for enhancing LLMs with relevant and up-to-date information. However, the retrieved sources can often bring conflicting information and it is not clear how models address such discrepancies. In this work, we first point out that knowledge conflicts stem from various reasons and thus require tailored solutions in order to better align model responses to human preferences. To that end, we introduce a novel taxonomy of knowledge conflicts in RAG and define the desired model’s behavior for each category. Additionally, we construct a high-quality benchmark by asking two expert annotators to identify the conflict type within realistic RAG instances, each comprising a query and its associated search results. Finally, we conduct extensive experiments and show that explicitly informing LLMs about the potential conflict category significantly improves the quality and appropriateness of the responses. Yet, there is still a vast room for improvement. Taken together, our work highlights the importance of evaluating RAG systems not only on factual accuracy but also on their ability to manage and resolve knowledge conflicts effectively. View details Scaling Large Language Models For Next-Generation Single-Cell Analysis Syed Asad Rizvi Daniel Levine Aakash Patel Shiyang Zhang Eric Wang Curtis Jamison Perry Nicole Mayerli Constante Sizhuang He David Zhang Cerise Tang Zhuoyang Lyu Rayyan Darji Chang Li Emily Sun David Jeong Lawrence Zhao Jennifer Kwan David Braun Brian Hafler Hattie Chung Rahul M. Dhodapkar Paul Jaeger Bryan Perozzi Jeffrey Ishizuka Shek Azizi David van Dijk biorxiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Single-cell RNA sequencing has transformed our understanding of cellular diversity, yet current singlecell foundation models (scFMs) remain limited in their scalability, flexibility across diverse tasks, and ability to natively integrate textual information. In this work, we build upon the Cell2Sentence (C2S) framework, which represents scRNA-seq profiles as textual “cell sentences,” to train Large Language Models (LLMs) on a corpus comprising over one billion tokens of transcriptomic data, biological text, and metadata. Scaling the model to 27 billion parameters yields consistent improvements in predictive and generative capabilities and supports advanced downstream tasks that require synthesis of information across multi-cellular contexts. Targeted fine-tuning with modern reinforcement learning techniques produces strong performance in perturbation response prediction, natural language interpretation, and complex biological reasoning. This predictive strength directly enabled a dualcontext virtual screen that uncovered a striking context split for the kinase inhibitor silmitasertib (CX-4945), suggesting its potential as a synergistic, interferon-conditional amplifier of antigen presentation. Experimental validation in human cell models unseen during training confirmed this hypothesis, demonstrating that C2S-Scale can generate biologically grounded, testable discoveries of context-conditioned biology. C2S-Scale unifies transcriptomic and textual data at unprecedented scales, surpassing both specialized single-cell models and general-purpose LLMs to provide a platform for next-generation single-cell analysis and the development of “virtual cells.” View details TRACT: Regression-Aware Fine-tuning Meets Chain-of-Thought Reasoning for LLM-as-a-Judge Cheng-Han Chiang Hung-yi Lee Michal Lukasik Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), Association for Computational Linguistics (2025) Preview Preview abstract The LLM-as-a-judge paradigm uses large language models (LLMs) for automated text evaluation, where a numerical assessment is assigned by an LLM to the input text following scoring rubrics. Existing methods for LLM-as-a-judge use cross-entropy (CE) loss for fine-tuning, which neglects the numeric nature of score prediction. Recent work addresses numerical prediction limitations of LLM fine-tuning through regression-aware fine-tuning, which, however, does not consider chain-of-thought (CoT) reasoning for score prediction. In this paper, we introduce TRACT (Two-stage Regression-Aware fine-tuning with CoT), a method combining CoT reasoning with regression-aware training. TRACT consists of two stages: first, seed LLM is fine-tuned to generate CoTs, which serve as supervision for the second stage fine-tuning. The training objective of TRACT combines the CE loss for learning the CoT reasoning capabilities, and the regression-aware loss for the score prediction. Experiments across four LLM-as-a-judge datasets and two LLMs show that TRACT significantly outperforms existing methods. Extensive ablation studies validate the importance of each component in TRACT. View details 27 28 29 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
