 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 106 - 120 of 676 publications chip template Remove Toward Sensor-In-the-Loop LLM Agent: Benchmarks and Implications Zhiwei Ren Junbo Li Minjia Zhang Di Wang Van Fan Longfei Shangguan SenSys 2025 - The 23rd ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper advocates for sensor-informed personal agents that can take advantage of sensor hints on wearables to enhance the personal agent's response. We demonstrate that such a sensor-in-the-loop design paradigm can be easily integrated into existing LLM agents by building a prototype named WellMax based on existing well-developed techniques such as structured prompt tuning and few-shot prompting. The head-to-head comparison with a non-sensor-informed agent across five use scenarios demonstrates that this sensor-in-the-loop design can effectively improve users' needs and their overall experience. The deep-dive into agents' replies and participants' feedback further reveals that sensor-in-the-loop agents not only provide more contextually relevant responses but also exhibit a greater understanding of user priorities and situational nuances. We further conduct two case studies to examine the potential pitfalls and distill key insights from this sensor-in-the-loop agent. We believe this work sets the stage for more intelligent, empathetic, and effective interactions in future AI-driven personal assistants. View details Google's Approach for Secure AI Agents Santiago (Sal) Díaz Christoph Kern Kara Olive Google (2025) Preview Preview abstract As part of Google's ongoing efforts to define best practices for secure AI systems, we’re sharing our aspirational framework for secure AI agents. We advocate for a hybrid, defense-in-depth strategy that combines the strengths of traditional, deterministic security controls with dynamic, reasoning-based defenses. This approach is grounded in three core principles: agents must have well-defined human controllers, their powers must be carefully limited, and their actions and planning must be observable. This paper reflects our current thinking and the direction of our efforts as we work towards ensuring that AI agents can be powerful, useful, and secure by default. View details GOALIE (GOAL oriented IntErventions) Proactive Multimodal Agent to Assist Augmented Reality Saptarashmi Bandyopadhyay Vikas Bahirwani Lavisha Aggarwal Bhanu Guda Lin Li Qin Liu Tom Goldstein John Dickerson Andrea Colaco 2025 Preview Preview abstract Multimodal AI Agents are helpful to assist and guide users in completing real-time tasks like cooking, robotics, manufacturing. An emerging form of multimodal communication is Augmented Reality (AR), where an AI Agent can enhance user experience with step-by-step guidance of tasks by observing the user's vision and language inputs. Current LLM or VLM based agents are reactive, waiting for an user query before responding. Proactive AI Agents in AR focus on detecting when the AI Agent should autonomously intervene to fix mistakes or followup any instruction. Our GOALIE (GOAL-oriented IntErvention) Agent is the first multimodal proactive AR agent which guides the user step-by-step on its own. We build an innovative Zero-Shot Prompting framework PSoS (Proactive Sequence of Steps) with the context of abstract past user actions, the agent's previous responses, and the user's granular goals and actions before it is detected that the AI Agent should intervene. We use PSoS for Supervised Finetuning (SFT), Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) and Group-Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) finetuning of our AI agent to improve the quality of the agent's proactive intervention. We also propose a new algorithmic framework, Bagged group Relative Policy Optimization (BRPO), to reduce the variance in rewards of generation groups, to adapt the finetuning algorithm for multimodal proactive interventions by the AI Agent and to enable real-time finetuning of the AI model. We compare the step-by-step intervention quality and efficiency of the GOALIE Agent with Gemma-3 models along with other VLMs for task execution with human expert labels. We conduct human evaluation of the proactive interventions, demonstrating user satisfaction with the GOALIE Agent's proactive interventions. We will release the code, model and human evaluation data. View details ESAM++: Efficient Online 3D Perception on the Edge Qin Liu Lavisha Aggarwal Vikas Bahirwani Lin Li Aleksander Holynski Saptarashmi Bandyopadhyay Zhengyang Shen Marc Niethammer Ehsan Adeli Andrea Colaco 2025 Preview Preview abstract Online 3D scene perception in real time is critical for robotics, AR/VR, and autonomous systems, particularly in edge computing scenarios where computational resources are limited. Recent state-of-the-art methods like EmbodiedSAM (ESAM) demonstrate the promise of online 3D perception by leveraging the 2D visual foundation model (VFM) with efficient 3D query lifting and merging. However, ESAM depends on a computationally expensive sparse 3D U-Net for point cloud feature extraction, which we identify as the primary efficiency bottleneck. In this paper, we propose a lightweight and scalable alternative for online 3D scene perception tailored to edge devices. Our method introduces a 3D Sparse FeaturePyramid Network (SFPN) that efficiently captures multi-scale geometric features from streaming 3D point clouds while significantly reducing computational over-head and model size. We evaluate our approach on four challenging segmentation benchmarks—ScanNet, ScanNet200, SceneNN, and 3RScan—demonstrating that our model achieves competitive accuracy with up to 3×faster inference and 3×small model size compared to ESAM, enabling practical deployment in real-world edge scenarios. Code and models will be released. View details Neural Pathways to Program Success: Hopfield Networks for PERT Analysis Azgar Ali N Proceedings of Technology and Engineering Management Society Conference (TEMSCON Global), IEEE (2025) Preview Preview abstract Project and task scheduling under uncertainty remains a fundamental challenge in program and project management, where accurate estimation of task durations and dependencies is critical for delivering complex, multi project systems. The Program Evaluation and Review Technique provides a probabilistic framework to model task variability and critical paths. In this paper, the author presents a novel formulation of PERT scheduling as an energy minimization problem within a Hopfield neural network architecture. By mapping task start times and precedence constraints into a neural computation framework, the networks inherent optimization dynamics is exploited to approximate globally consistent schedules. The author addresses key theoretical issues related to energy function differentiability, constraint encoding, and convergence, and extends the Hopfield model for structured precedence graphs. Numerical simulations on synthetic project networks comprising up to 1000 tasks demonstrate the viability of this approach, achieving near optimal makespans with minimal constraint violations. The findings suggest that neural optimization models offer a promising direction for scalable and adaptive project tasks scheduling under uncertainty in areas such as the agentic AI workflows, microservice based applications that the modern AI systems are being built upon. View details Mitigating Clinician Information Overload: Generative AI for Integrated EHR and RPM Data Analysis Ankit Shetgaonkar Dipen Pradhan Lakshit Arora Sanjay Surendranath Girija Shashank Kapoor Aman Raj IEEE Compsac 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Generative AI (GenAI), particularly Large Language Models (LLMs), offer powerful capabilities for interpreting the complex data landscape in healthcare. In this paper, we present a comprehensive overview of the capabilities, requirements and applications of GenAI for deriving clinical insights and improving clinical efficiency. We first provide some background on the forms and sources of patient data, namely real-time Remote Patient Monitoring (RPM) streams and traditional Electronic Health Records (EHR). The sheer volume and heterogeneity of this combined data present significant challenges to clinicians and contribute to information overload. In addition, we explore the potential of LLM-powered applications for improving clinical efficiency. These applications can enhance navigation of longitudinal patient data and provide actionable clinical decision support through natural language dialogue. We discuss the opportunities this presents for streamlining clinician workflows and personalizing care, alongside critical challenges such as data integration complexity, ensuring data quality and RPM data reliability, maintaining patient privacy, validating AI outputs for clinical safety, mitigating bias, and ensuring clinical acceptance. We believe this work represents the first summarization of GenAI techniques for managing clinician data overload due to combined RPM / EHR data complexities. View details Astute RAG: Overcoming Imperfect Retrieval Augmentation and Knowledge Conflicts for Large Language Models Fei Wang Xingchen Wan Ruoxi Sun Jiefeng Chen Sercan Arik The Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL 2025) (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), while effective in integrating external knowledge to address the limitations of large language models (LLMs), can be undermined by imperfect retrieval, which may introduce irrelevant, misleading, or even malicious information. Despite its importance, previous studies have rarely explored the behavior of RAG through joint analysis on how errors from imperfect retrieval attribute and propagate, and how potential conflicts arise between the LLMs' internal knowledge and external sources. We find that imperfect retrieval augmentation might be inevitable and quite harmful, through controlled analysis under realistic conditions. We identify the knowledge conflicts between LLM-internal and external knowledge from retrieval as a bottleneck to overcome in the post-retrieval stage of RAG. To render LLMs resilient to imperfect retrieval, we propose Astute RAG, a novel RAG approach that adaptively elicits essential information from LLMs' internal knowledge, iteratively consolidates internal and external knowledge with source-awareness, and finalizes the answer according to information reliability. Our experiments using Gemini and Claude demonstrate that Astute RAG significantly outperforms previous robustness-enhanced RAG methods. Notably, Astute RAG is the only approach that matches or exceeds the performance of LLMs without RAG under worst-case scenarios. Further analysis reveals that Astute RAG effectively resolves knowledge conflicts, improving the reliability and trustworthiness of RAG systems. View details Omnia de EgoTempo: Benchmarking Temporal Understanding of Multi-Modal LLMs in Egocentric Videos Chiara Plizzari Alessio Tonioni Yongqin Xian Ace Kulshrestha Federico Tombari 2025 Preview Preview abstract Understanding fine-grained temporal dynamics is crucial in egocentric videos, where continuous streams capture frequent, close-up interactions with objects. In this work, we bring to light that current egocentric video question-answering datasets often include questions that can be answered using only few frames or commonsense reasoning, without being necessarily grounded in the actual video. Our analysis shows that state-of-the-art Multi-Modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) on these benchmarks achieve remarkably high performance using just text or a single frame as input. To address these limitations, we introduce EgoTempo, a dataset specifically designed to evaluate temporal understanding in the egocentric domain. EgoTempo emphasizes tasks that require integrating information across the entire video, ensuring that models would need to rely on temporal patterns rather than static cues or pre-existing knowledge. Extensive experiments on EgoTempo show that current MLLMs still fall short in temporal reasoning on egocentric videos, and thus we hope EgoTempo will catalyze new research in the field and inspire models that better capture the complexity of temporal dynamics. Dataset and code are available at https://github.com/google-research-datasets/egotempo.git. View details Test-Time Visual In-Context Tuning Jiahao Xie Alessio Tonioni Nathalie Rauschmayr Federico Tombari Bernt Schiele 2025 Preview Preview abstract Visual in-context learning (VICL), as a new paradigm in computer vision, allows the model to rapidly adapt to various tasks with only a handful of prompts and examples. While effective, the existing VICL paradigm exhibits poor generalizability under distribution shifts. In this work, we propose test-time visual in-context tuning (VICT), a method that can learn adaptive VICL models on the fly with a single test sample. Specifically, We flip the role between task prompts and the test sample and use a cycle consistency loss to reconstruct the original task prompt output. Our key insight is that a model should be aware of a new test distribution if it can successfully recover the original task prompts. Extensive experiments on seven representative vision tasks with 15 corruptions demonstrate that our VICT can improve the generalizability of VICL to unseen new domains View details Zero-Shot Offline Styled Text Image Generation, but Make It Autoregressive Vittorio Pippi Fabio Quattrini Silvia Cascianelli Alessio Tonioni Rita Cucchiara 2025 Preview Preview abstract Styled Handwritten Text Generation (HTG) has recently received attention from the computer vision and document analysis communities, which have developed several solutions, either GAN- or diffusion-based, that achieved promising results. Nonetheless, these strategies fail to generalize to novel styles and have technical constraints, particularly in terms of maximum output length and training efficiency. To overcome these limitations, in this work, we propose a novel framework for text image generation, dubbed Emuru. Our approach leverages a powerful text image representation model (a variational autoencoder) combined with an autoregressive Transformer. Our approach enables the generation of styled text images conditioned on textual content and style examples, such as specific fonts or handwriting styles. We train our model solely on a diverse, synthetic dataset of English text rendered in over 100,000 typewritten and calligraphy fonts, which gives it the capability to reproduce unseen styles (both fonts and users' handwriting) in zero-shot. To the best of our knowledge, Emuru is the first autoregressive model for HTG, and the first designed specifically for generalization to novel styles. Moreover, our model generates images without background artifacts, which are easier to use for downstream applications. Extensive evaluation on both typewritten and handwritten, any-length text image generation scenarios demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach. View details Deletion Robust Non-Monotone Submodular Maximization over Matroids Paul Duetting Federico Fusco Morteza Zadimoghaddam Ashkan Norouzi Fard Silvio Lattanzi Journal of Machine Learning Research, 26 (2025), pp. 1-28 Preview Preview abstract Maximizing a submodular function is a fundamental task in machine learning and in this paper we study the deletion robust version of the problem under the classic matroids constraint. Here the goal is to extract a small size summary of the dataset that contains a high value independent set even after an adversary deleted some elements. We present constant-factor approximation algorithms, whose space complexity depends on the rank $k$ of the matroid and the number $d$ of deleted elements. In the centralized setting we present a $(4.597+O(\eps))$-approximation algorithm with summary size $O( \frac{k+d}{\eps^2}\log \frac{k}{\eps})$ that is improved to a $(3.582+O(\eps))$-approximation with $O(k + \frac{d}{\eps^2}\log \frac{k}{\eps})$ summary size when the objective is monotone. In the streaming setting we provide a $(9.435 + O(\eps))$-approximation algorithm with summary size and memory $O(k + \frac{d}{\eps^2}\log \frac{k}{\eps})$; the approximation factor is then improved to $(5.582+O(\eps))$ in the monotone case. View details "It is important to consult" a linguist: Verb-Argument Constructions in ChatGPT and human experts' medical and financial advice Chris Stewart Alistair Windsor J. Elliott Casal PLOS One (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper adopts a Usage-Based Construction Grammar perspective to compare human- and AI-generated language, focusing on Verb-Argument Constructions (VACs) as a lens for analysis. Specifically, we examine solicited advice texts in two domains—Finance and Medicine—produced by humans and ChatGPT across different GPT models (3.5, 4, and 4o) and interfaces (3.5 Web vs. 3.5 API). Our findings reveal broad consistency in the frequency and distribution of the most common VACs across human- and AI-generated texts, though ChatGPT exhibits a slightly higher reliance on the most frequent constructions. A closer examination of the verbs occupying these constructions uncovers significant differences in the meanings conveyed, with a notable growth away from human-like language production in macro level perspectives (e.g., length) and towards humanlike verb-VAC patterns with newer models. These results underscore the potential of VACs as a powerful tool for analyzing AI-generated language and tracking its evolution over time. View details Record Number of Members Visit U.S. Congress to Talk Tech Policy Azgar Ali N IEEE Spectrum (2025) Preview Preview abstract This IEEE Spectrum article reflects on advocacy for U.S. technological leadership during my Congressional visit through IEEE-USA. Leading an expert group of other distinguished IEEE members, we urged lawmakers to support critical initiatives. Key priorities included sustained funding for federal research institutions like NIST, NASA, and the NSF, reauthorizing the SBIR/STTR programs vital for small business innovation, and passing the CREATE AI Act to democratize AI resources by establishing the National AI Research Resource (NAIRR). We also emphasized strengthening the STEM talent pipeline through the CHIPS and Science Act and expanding high-skilled immigrant visas. We highlighted rapid AI advancements, such as autonomous vehicles, the surge in FDA-approved AI based medical devices, as underscoring the need for these strategic investments and policy actions. The article conveys a sense of urgency, calling for concrete congressional action to ensure the U.S. maintains its technological edge while also sharing my personal experiences. View details Closing the AI generalisation gap by adjusting for dermatology condition distribution differences across clinical settings Rajeev Rikhye Aaron Loh Grace Hong Preeti Singh Margaret Ann Smith Vijaytha Muralidharan Doris Wong Rory Sayres Ayush Jain Michelle Phung Nicolas Betancourt Bradley Fong Rachna Sahasrabudhe Khoban Nasim Alec Eschholz Basil Mustafa Jan Freyberg Terry Spitz Yossi Matias Greg Corrado Kat Chou Dale Webster Peggy Bui Yuan Liu Yun Liu Justin Ko Steven Lin The Lancet eBioMedicine (2025) Preview Preview abstract Background: Generalisation of artificial intelligence (AI) models to a new setting is challenging. In this study, we seek to understand the robustness of a dermatology (AI) model and whether it generalises from telemedicine cases to a new setting including both patient-submitted photographs (“PAT”) and clinician-taken photographs in-clinic (“CLIN”). Methods: A retrospective cohort study involving 2500 cases previously unseen by the AI model, including both PAT and CLIN cases, from 22 clinics in the San Francisco Bay Area, spanning November 2015 to January 2021. The primary outcome measure for the AI model and dermatologists was the top-3 accuracy, defined as whether their top 3 differential diagnoses contained the top reference diagnosis from a panel of dermatologists per case. Findings: The AI performed similarly between PAT and CLIN images (74% top-3 accuracy in CLIN vs. 71% in PAT), however, dermatologists were more accurate in PAT images (79% in CLIN vs. 87% in PAT). We demonstrate that demographic factors were not associated with AI or dermatologist errors; instead several categories of conditions were associated with AI model errors (p View details Scaling Wearable Foundation Models Girish Narayanswamy Xin Liu Kumar Ayush Yuzhe Yang Orson Xu Shun Liao Jake Garrison Shyam Tailor Jake Sunshine Yun Liu Tim Althoff Shrikanth (Shri) Narayanan Pushmeet Kohli Jiening Zhan Mark Malhotra Shwetak Patel Samy Abdel-Ghaffar Daniel McDuff 2025 Preview Preview abstract Wearable sensors have become ubiquitous thanks to a variety of health tracking features. The resulting continuous and longitudinal measurements from everyday life generate large volumes of data. However, making sense of these observations for scientific and actionable insights is non-trivial. Inspired by the empirical success of generative modeling, where large neural networks learn powerful representations from vast amounts of text, image, video, or audio data, we investigate the scaling properties of wearable sensor foundation models across compute, data, and model size. Using a dataset of up to 40 million hours of in-situ heart rate, heart rate variability, accelerometer, electrodermal activity, skin temperature, and altimeter per-minute data from over 165,000 people, we create LSM, a multimodal foundation model built on the largest wearable-signals dataset with the most extensive range of sensor modalities to date. Our results establish the scaling laws of LSM for tasks such as imputation, interpolation and extrapolation across both time and sensor modalities. Moreover, we highlight how LSM enables sample-efficient downstream learning for tasks including exercise and activity recognition. View details 8 9 10 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
