 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 31 - 45 of 676 publications chip template Remove Mufu: Multilingual Fused Learning for Low- Resource Translation with LLM Zheng Lim Nitish Gupta Honglin Yu Trevor Cohn International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) 2025 Preview Preview abstract Multilingual large language models (LLMs) are great translators, but this is largely limited to high-resource languages. For many LLMs, translating in and out of low-resource languages remains a challenging task. To maximize data efficiency in this low-resource setting, we introduce Mufu, which includes a selection of automatically generated multilingual candidates and an instruction to correct inaccurate translations in the prompt. Mufu prompts turn a translation task into a postediting one, and seek to harness the LLM's reasoning capability with auxiliary translation candidates, from which the model is required to assess the input quality, align the semantics cross-lingually, copy from relevant inputs and override instances that are incorrect. Our experiments on En-XX translations over the Flores-200 dataset show LLMs finetuned against Mufu-style prompts are robust to poor quality auxiliary translation candidates, achieving performance superior to NLLB 1.3B distilled model in 64% of low- and very-low-resource language pairs. We then distill these models to reduce inference cost, while maintaining on average 3.1 chrF improvement over finetune-only baseline in low-resource translations. View details Weightless Neural Networks: An Efficient Edge Inference Architecture Felipe França Priscila Lima Lizy John (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Mainstream artificial neural network models, such as Deep Neural Networks (DNNs) are computation-heavy and energy-hungry. Weightless Neural Networks (WNNs) are natively built with RAM-based neurons and represent an entirely distinct type of neural network computing compared to DNNs. WNNs are extremely low-latency, low-energy, and suitable for efficient, accurate, edge inference. The WNN approach derives an implicit inspiration from the decoding process observed in the dendritic trees of biological neurons, making neurons based on Random Access Memories (RAMs) and/or Lookup Tables (LUTs) ready-to-deploy neuromorphic digital circuits. Since FPGAs are abundant in LUTs, LUT based WNNs are a natural fit for implementing edge inference in FPGAs. WNNs has been demonstrated to be an energetically efficient AI model, both in software, as well as in hardware. For instance, the most recent DWN – Differential Weightless Neural Network – model demonstrates up to 135× reduction in energy costs in FPGA implementations compared to other multiplication-free approaches, such as binary neural networks (BNNs) and DiffLogicNet, up to 9% higher accuracy in deployments on constrained devices, and culminate in up to 42.8× reduction in circuit area for ultra-low-cost chip implementations. This tutorial will help participants understand how WNNs work, why WNNs were underdogs for such a long time, and be introduced to the most recent members of the WNN family, such as BTHOWeN , LogicWiSARD, COIN, ULEEN and DWN, and contrast to BNNs and LogicNets. View details Triaging mammography with artificial intelligence: an implementation study Sarah M. Friedewald Marcin Sieniek Sunny Jansen Fereshteh Mahvar Timo Kohlberger David V. Schacht Sonya Bhole Dipti Gupta Shruthi Prabhakara Scott Mayer McKinney Stacey Caron David Melnick Mozziyar Etemadi Samantha Winter T Saensuksopa Alejandra Maciel Luca Speroni Martha Sevenich Arnav Agharwal Rubin Zhang Gavin Duggan Shiro Kadowaki Atilla Kiraly Jie Yang Basil Mustafa Yossi Matias Greg Corrado Daniel Tse Krish Eswaran Shravya Shetty Breast Cancer Research and Treatment (2025) Preview Preview abstract Purpose Many breast centers are unable to provide immediate results at the time of screening mammography which results in delayed patient care. Implementing artificial intelligence (AI) could identify patients who may have breast cancer and accelerate the time to diagnostic imaging and biopsy diagnosis. Methods In this prospective randomized, unblinded, controlled implementation study we enrolled 1000 screening participants between March 2021 and May 2022. The experimental group used an AI system to prioritize a subset of cases for same-visit radiologist evaluation, and same-visit diagnostic workup if necessary. The control group followed the standard of care. The primary operational endpoints were time to additional imaging (TA) and time to biopsy diagnosis (TB). Results The final cohort included 463 experimental and 392 control participants. The one-sided Mann-Whitney U test was employed for analysis of TA and TB. In the control group, the TA was 25.6 days [95% CI 22.0–29.9] and TB was 55.9 days [95% CI 45.5–69.6]. In comparison, the experimental group's mean TA was reduced by 25% (6.4 fewer days [one-sided 95% CI > 0.3], p 5.1], p=0.003). The time reduction was more pronounced for AI-prioritized participants in the experimental group. All participants eventually diagnosed with breast cancer were prioritized by the AI. Conclusions Implementing AI prioritization can accelerate care timelines for patients requiring additional workup, while maintaining the efficiency of delayed interpretation for most participants. Reducing diagnostic delays could contribute to improved patient adherence, decreased anxiety and addressing disparities in access to timely care. View details SMaCk: Efficient Instruction Cache Attacks via Self-Modifying Code Conflicts Seonghun Son Daniel Moghimi Berk Gulmezoglu ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Self-modifying code (SMC) allows programs to alter their own instructions, optimizing performance and functionality on x86 processors. Despite its benefits, SMC introduces unique microarchitectural behaviors that can be exploited for malicious purposes. In this paper, we explore the security implications of SMC by examining how specific x86 instructions affecting instruction cache lines lead to measurable timing discrepancies between cache hits and misses. These discrepancies facilitate refined cache attacks, making them less noisy and more effective. We introduce novel attack techniques that leverage these timing variations to enhance existing methods such as Prime+Probe and Flush+Reload. Our advanced techniques allow adversaries to more precisely attack cryptographic keys and create covert channels akin to Spectre across various x86 platforms. Finally, we propose a dynamic detection methodology utilizing hardware performance counters to mitigate these enhanced threats. View details H2E: Hand, Head, Eye: A Multimodal Cascade of Natural Inputs Khushman Patel Vrushank Phadnis Eric Gonzalez Hans Gellersen Ken Pfeuffer Mar Gonzalez Franco IEEE VR (2025) Preview Preview abstract Eye-based interaction techniques for extended reality, such as gaze and pinch, are simple to use however suffer from input precision issues. We present H2E, a fine and coarse-grained pointing technique that cascades Hand, Head, and Eye inputs. As users initiate a pinch gesture, a cursor appears at the gaze point that can be dragged by head pointing before pinch confirmation. This has the potential advantage that it can add a precision component without changing the semantics of the technique. In this paper, we describe the design and implementation of the technique. Furthermore, we present an evaluation of our method in a Fitts-based user study, exploring the speed-accuracy trade-offs against a gaze and pinch interaction baseline. View details SSDTrain: Faster Large Language Model Training Using SSD-Based Activation Offloading Kun Wu Jeongmin Brian Park Xiaofan Zhang Mert Hidayetoğlu Vikram Sharma Mailthody Sitao Huang Steven Lumetta Wen-mei Hwu Design Automation Conference (DAC) (2025) Preview Preview abstract The scaling up of Large Language Models (LLMs) demands more memory than current GPUs can provide, hindering the training process. To address this challenge, we propose SSDTrain to efficiently offload activations, the intermediate tensors produced during LLM training, to SSDs. This approach reduces GPU memory usage without impacting performance by adaptively overlapping data transfers with computation. SSDTrain is compatible with popular deep learning frameworks like PyTorch, Megatron, and DeepSpeed, and it employs techniques such as tensor deduplication, forwarding, and adaptive offloading to further enhance efficiency. We conduct extensive experiments on Llama, BERT, and T5. Results demonstrate that SSDTrain effectively reduces 45% of the activation peak memory usage. It can perfectly overlap the IO with the computation without introducing performance penalty. SSDTrain can achieve a performance boost of up to 31% compared to the conventional training strategy using the same GPU systems. View details Online Bidding under RoS Constraints without Knowing the Value Sushant Vijayan Zhe Feng Swati Padmanabhan Karthikeyan Shanmugam Arun Suggala Di Wang The Web Conference (2025) Preview Preview abstract We consider the problem of auto-bidding in online advertising from the perspective of a single advertiser. The goal of the advertiser is to maximize their value under the Return-on-Spend (RoS) constraint, with performance measured in terms of \emph{regret} against the optimal offline solution that knows all queries a priori. Importantly, the value of the item is \textit{unknown} to the bidder ahead of time. The goal of the bidder is to quickly identify the optimal bid, while simultaneously satisfying budget and RoS constraints. Using a simple UCB-style algorithm, we provide the first result which achieves optimal regret and constraint violation for this problem. View details Society-Centric Product Innovation in the Era of Customer Obsession Nupur Jain International Journal of Science and Research Archive (IJSRA), Volume 14 - Issue 1 (2025) Preview Preview abstract This article provides a comprehensive analysis of the evolving landscape of innovation in the technology sector, with a focus on the intersection of technological progress and social responsibility. The article explores key challenges facing the industry, including public trust erosion, digital privacy concerns, and the impact of automation on workforce dynamics. It investigates responsible innovation frameworks' emergence and implementation across various organizations, highlighting the transformation from traditional development approaches to more society-centric models. The article demonstrates how companies balance innovation speed with social responsibility, incorporate ethical considerations into their development processes, and address digital disparities across different demographics. By examining how companies balance the pace of innovation with ethical responsibilities, integrate social considerations into their processes, and address digital inequities across diverse demographics, the article underscores the transformative potential of these frameworks. Through insights into cross-functional teams, impact assessment tools, and stakeholder engagement strategies, it demonstrates how responsible innovation drives both sustainable business value and societal progress. View details Deviate or Not: Learning Coalition Structures with Multi-bit Observations in Games Yixuan Even Xu Zhe Feng Fei Fang AAAI (2025) Preview Preview abstract We consider the Coalition Structure Learning (CSL) problem in multi-agent systems, motivated by the existence of coalitions in many real-world systems, e.g., trading platforms and auction systems. In this problem, there is a hidden coalition structure within a set of $n$ agents, which affects the behavior of the agents in games. Our goal is to actively design a sequence of games for the agents to play, such that observations in these games can be used to learn the hidden coalition structure. In particular, we consider the setting where in each round, we design and present a game together with a strategy profile to the agents, and receive a multiple-bit observation -- for each agent, we observe whether or not they would like to deviate from the specified strategy in this given game. Our contributions are three-fold: First, we show that we can learn the coalition structure in $O(\log n)$ rounds if we are allowed to choose any normal-form game in each round, matching the information-theoretical lower bound, and the result can be extended to congestion games. Second, in a more restricted setting where we can only choose a graphical game with degree limit $d$, we develop an algorithm to learn the coalition structure in $O(n/d+\log d)$ rounds. Third, when we can only learn the coalition structure through running second-price auctions with personalized reserve prices, we show that the coalition structure can be learned in $O(c\log n)$ rounds, where $c$ is the size of the largest coalition. View details Right to be Delisted: Attitudes toward delisting of public interest information Ryan Lloyd Rebecca Umbach Journal of Online Trust and Safety, 2 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Despite the advent of legislation such as the General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) with its associated "Right to be Forgotten" (RTBF), few, if any, studies have measured user reactions to realistic edge cases with public-interest content. Surveying both users covered by and excluded from RTBF, this vignette-based survey experiment sought to better understand how users think of delisting content from search engine results and what factors influence user perceptions. While leaving information accessible in search engine results generally leads to warmer feelings towards those search engines than delisting it, we find that users do prefer different outcomes depending on contextual elements specific to given cases. We also find that whether a country has active RTBF legislation does seem to be associated with both knowledge and attitudes about RTBF, but is unlikely to explain all of it. These results indicate a complex context around removing public-interest content from search engines’ results; it is essential that experts sensitive to local context perform the review in order to ensure that removal requests are handled in a way that meets users’ expectations. View details AI as a Catalyst for Educational Equity: Addressing Global Teacher Shortages and Learning Disparities Nupur Jain International Journal of Scientific Research in Computer Science, Engineering and Information Technology (IJSRCERT) (2025) Preview Preview abstract The global education system is grappling with a critical shortage of teachers, threatening the achievement of universal quality education. This article examines how artificial intelligence (AI) technologies can revolutionize educational access and equity by addressing these systemic challenges. Through a comprehensive article analysis of AI-enabled solutions, including personalized learning mechanisms, virtual tutoring systems, and intelligent content distribution platforms, the article explores the transformative potential of these technologies in democratizing education. The article investigates the implementation of AI across established educational platforms, examining their effectiveness in providing adaptive learning experiences, breaking down language barriers, and ensuring cultural relevance. The article demonstrates that strategic AI integration can significantly impact learning outcomes while helping to bridge the global teacher shortage gap. The article also addresses critical implementation challenges, providing policy recommendations and resource allocation frameworks for successful AI adoption in education systems worldwide. This article analysis contributes to the growing body of knowledge on educational technology by offering practical insights into how AI can be leveraged to create more inclusive, effective, and accessible learning environments, ultimately advancing the goal of quality education for all. View details Avoid global outages by partitioning cloud applications to reduce blast radius Karan Anand https://cloud.google.com/ (2025) Preview Preview abstract Cloud application development faces the inherent challenge of balancing rapid innovation with high availability. This blog post details how Google Workspace's Site Reliability Engineering team addresses this conflict by implementing vertical partitioning of serving stacks. By isolating application servers and storage into distinct partitions, the "blast radius" of code changes and updates is significantly reduced, minimizing the risk of global outages. This approach, which complements canary deployments, enhances service availability, provides flexibility for experimentation, and facilitates data localization. While challenges such as data model complexities and inter-service partition misalignment exist, the benefits of improved reliability and controlled deployments make partitioning a crucial strategy for maintaining robust cloud applications View details A Strategic Framework for AI Product Development and Evaluation in Enterprise Software Nupur Jain International Journal of Computer Engineering and Technology (IJCET), Volume 16, Issue 1 (2025) Preview Preview abstract This article presents a comprehensive framework for developing and evaluating AI products in enterprise software systems, addressing the critical challenges organizations face during AI transformation initiatives. The article introduces a structured approach to decision-making for AI integration, encompassing ROI evaluation, user value assessment, and business impact analysis. It establishes distinct methodologies for both assistive and autonomous AI systems, providing detailed metrics for measuring success and performance across different implementation scenarios. Across various industries, the framework has shown potential in reducing implementation time, increasing user adoption rates, and enhancing overall project success rates, highlighting its practical applicability. The article methodology combines theoretical analysis with practical case studies, resulting in a flexible yet robust framework that can adapt to various organizational contexts. The framework's primary contribution lies in its practical approach to bridging the gap between theoretical AI capabilities and real-world implementation challenges, offering product leaders a systematic methodology for AI product development and evaluation. By addressing both current implementation challenges and future scalability requirements, this framework provides organizations with a foundational tool for navigating their AI transformation journey while maintaining a focus on measurable business outcomes and user value creation. View details AI Agents for Cloud Reliability: Autonomous Threat Detection and Mitigation Aligned with Site Reliability Engineering Principles Karan Anand Mourya Chigurupati 2025 Preview Fast electronic structure quantum simulation by spectrum amplification Guang Hao Low Robbie King Dominic Berry Qiushi Han Albert Eugene DePrince III Alec White Ryan Babbush Rolando Somma Nicholas Rubin arXiv:2502.15882 (2025) Preview Preview abstract The most advanced techniques using fault-tolerant quantum computers to estimate the ground-state energy of a chemical Hamiltonian involve compression of the Coulomb operator through tensor factorizations, enabling efficient block-encodings of the Hamiltonian. A natural challenge of these methods is the degree to which block-encoding costs can be reduced. We address this challenge through the technique of spectrum amplification, which magnifies the spectrum of the low-energy states of Hamiltonians that can be expressed as sums of squares. Spectrum amplification enables estimating ground-state energies with significantly improved cost scaling in the block encoding normalization factor $\Lambda$ to just $\sqrt{2\Lambda E_{\text{gap}}}$, where $E_{\text{gap}} \ll \Lambda$ is the lowest energy of the sum-of-squares Hamiltonian. To achieve this, we show that sum-of-squares representations of the electronic structure Hamiltonian are efficiently computable by a family of classical simulation techniques that approximate the ground-state energy from below. In order to further optimize, we also develop a novel factorization that provides a trade-off between the two leading Coulomb integral factorization schemes-- namely, double factorization and tensor hypercontraction-- that when combined with spectrum amplification yields a factor of 4 to 195 speedup over the state of the art in ground-state energy estimation for models of Iron-Sulfur complexes and a CO$_{2}$-fixation catalyst. View details 3 4 5 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
