 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 196 - 210 of 676 publications chip template Remove Wave: Offloading Resource Management to SmartNIC Cores Jack Humphries Neel Natu Kostis Kaffes Stanko Novakovic Paul Turner Hank Levy David Culler Christos Kozyrakis 2025 Preview Preview abstract SmartNICs are increasingly deployed in datacenters to offload tasks from server CPUs, improving the efficiency and flexibility of datacenter security, networking and storage. Optimizing cloud server efficiency in this way is critically important to ensure that virtually all server resources are available to paying customers. Userspace system software, specifically, decision-making tasks performed by various operating system subsystems, is particularly well suited for execution on mid-tier SmartNIC ARM cores. To this end, we introduce Wave, a framework for offloading userspace system software to processes/agents running on the SmartNIC. Wave uses Linux userspace systems to better align system functionality with SmartNIC capabilities. It also introduces a new host-SmartNIC communication API that enables offloading of even μs-scale system software. To evaluate Wave, we offloaded preexisting userspace system software including kernel thread scheduling, memory management, and an RPC stack to SmartNIC ARM cores, which showed a performance degradation of 1.1%-7.4% in an apples-to-apples comparison with on-host implementations. Wave recovered host resources consumed by on-host system software for memory management (saving 16 host cores), RPCs (saving 8 host cores), and virtual machines (an 11.2% performance improvement). Wave highlights the potential for rethinking system software placement in modern datacenters, unlocking new opportunities for efficiency and scalability. View details Confidence Improves Self-Consistency in LLMs Amir Taubenfeld Tom Sheffer Eran Ofek Amir Feder Ariel Goldstein Zorik Gekhman Gal Yona ACL 2025, Findings (2025) Preview Preview abstract Self-consistency decoding enhances LLMs’ performance on reasoning tasks by sampling diverse reasoning paths and selecting the most frequent answer. However, it is computationally expensive, as sampling many of these (lengthy) paths is required to increase the chances that the correct answer emerges as the most frequent one. To address this, we introduce Confidence-Informed Self-Consistency (CISC). CISC performs a weighted majority vote based on confidence scores obtained directly from the model. By prioritizing high-confidence paths, it can identify the correct answer with a significantly smaller sample size. When tested on nine models and four datasets, CISC outperforms self-consistency in nearly all configurations, reducing the required number of reasoning paths by over 40% on average. In addition, we introduce the notion of within-question confidence evaluation, after showing that standard evaluation methods are poor predictors of success in distinguishing correct and incorrect answers to the same question. In fact, the most calibrated confidence method proved to be the least effective for CISC. Lastly, beyond these practical implications, our results and analyses show that LLMs can effectively judge the correctness of their own outputs, contributing to the ongoing debate on this topic. View details The ASPLOS 2025 / EuroSys 2025 Contest on Intra-Operator Parallelism for Distributed Deep Learning Michael Moffitt Pratik Fegade Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (2025), pp. 5-17 Preview Preview abstract A chief enabler of large-scale deep learning is the distribution of computation across multiple interconnected hardware accelerators. In order to unlock the maximum possible performance, a compiler must first select a reasonable strategy to parallelize a model's operations. Since neural network architectures admit multiple flavors of parallelism, determining the proper strategy for each instruction is a critical (albeit non-trivial) task. To solicit new ideas toward solving this challenging combinatorial optimization problem, we organized the ASPLOS 2025 / EuroSys 2025 Contest on Intra-Operator Parallelism for Distributed Deep Learning, a multi-month competition focused on advancing the state-of-the-art for model partitioning algorithms. In this paper, we offer a retrospective of this event, including the basic problem formulation, key challenges & opportunities, our new benchmark suite, and the quality of submissions received. View details Data-Driven Mechanism Design: Jointly Eliciting Preferences and Information Dirk Bergemann Marek Bojko Paul Duetting Renato Paes Leme Haifeng Xu Song Zuo EC '25: Proceedings of the 26th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (2025), pp. 507 Preview Preview abstract We study mechanism design when agents have private preferences and private information about a common payoff-relevant state. We show that standard message-driven mechanisms cannot implement socially efficient allocations when agents have multidimensional types, even under favorable conditions. To overcome this limitation, we propose data-driven mechanisms that leverage additional post-allocation information, modeled as an estimator of the payoff-relevant state. Our data-driven mechanisms extend the classic Vickrey-Clarke-Groves class. We show that they achieve exact implementation in posterior equilibrium when the state is either fully revealed or the utility is affine in an unbiased estimator. We also show that they achieve approximate implementation with a consistent estimator, converging to exact implementation as the estimator converges, and present bounds on the convergence rate. We demonstrate applications to digital advertising auctions and large language model (LLM)-based mechanisms, where user engagement naturally reveals relevant information. View details CASE: An Agentic AI Framework for Enhancing Scam Intelligence in Digital Payments Nitish Jaipuria Jose Estevez Shankey Poddar Ramanan Balakrishnan Aviral Suri Lorenzo Gatto Zijun Kan Diksha Bansal Bill Cheung 2025 Preview Preview abstract The proliferation of digital payment platforms has transformed commerce, offering unmatched convenience and accessibility globally. However, this growth has also attracted malicious actors, leading to a corresponding increase in sophisticated social engineering scams. These scams are often initiated and orchestrated on multiple surfaces outside the payment platform, making user and transaction-based signals insufficient for a complete understanding of the scam's methodology and underlying patterns, without which it is very difficult to prevent it in a timely manner. This paper presents CASE (Conversational Agent for Scam Elucidation), a novel Agentic AI framework that addresses this problem by collecting and managing user scam feedback in a safe and scalable manner. A conversational agent is uniquely designed to proactively interview potential victims to elicit intelligence in the form of a detailed conversation. The conversation transcripts are then consumed by another AI system that extracts information and converts it into structured data for downstream usage in automated and manual enforcement mechanisms. Using Google's Gemini family of LLMs, we implemented this framework on Google Pay (GPay) India. By augmenting our existing features with this new intelligence, we have observed a 21% uplift in the volume of scam enforcements. The architecture and its robust evaluation framework are highly generalizable, offering a blueprint for building similar AI-driven systems to collect and manage scam intelligence in other sensitive domains. View details Procurement Auctions via Approximate Submodular Optimization Yuan Deng Amin Karbasi Vahab Mirrokni Renato Paes Leme Grigoris Velegkas Song Zuo Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study the problem of procurement auctions, in which an auctioneer seeks to acquire services from a group of strategic sellers with private costs. The quality of the services is measured through some \emph{submodular} function that is known to the auctioneer. Our goal is to design \emph{computationally efficient} procurement auctions that (approximately) maximize the difference between the quality of the acquired services and the total cost of the sellers, in a way that is incentive compatible (IC) and individual rational (IR) for the sellers, and generates non-negative surplus (NAS) for the auctioneer. Leveraging recent results from the literature of \emph{non-positive} submodular function maximization, we design computationally efficient frameworks that transform submodular function optimization algorithms to \emph{mechanisms} that are IC and IR for the sellers, NAS for the auctioneer, and \emph{approximation-preserving}. Our frameworks are general and work both in the \emph{offline} setting where the auctioneer can observe the bids and the services of all the sellers simultaneously, and in the \emph{online} setting where the sellers arrive in an adversarial order and the auctioneer has to make an irrevocable decision whether to purchase their service or not. We further investigate whether it is possible to convert state-of-art submodular optimization algorithms into a descending auction. We focurs in the adversarial setting, meaning that the schedule of the descending prices is determined by an advesary. We show that a submodular optimization algorithm satisfying bi-criteria $(\alpha, 1)$-approximation in welfare can be effectively converted to a descending auction in the adversarial setting in if and only if $\alpha \leq \frac 1 2$. Our result highlights the importance of a carefully designed schedule of descending prices to effectively convert a submodular optimization algorithm satisfying bi-criteria $(\alpha, 1)$-approximation in welfare with $\alpha > \frac 1 2$ to a descending auction. We also further establish a connection between descending auctions and online submodular optimization algorithms. We demonstrate the practical applications of our frameworks by instantiating them with different state-of-the-art submodular optimization algorithms and comparing their welfare performance through empirical experiments on publicly available datasets that consist of thousands of sellers. View details Security Assurance in the Age of Generative AI Tom Grzelak Kara Olive Moni Pande Google, Google, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway, Mountain View, CA, 94043 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Artificial Intelligence (AI) is a rapidly growing field known for experimentation and quick iteration, qualities that can pose challenges for traditional enterprise security approaches. Because AI introduces unique assets and surfaces—AI-driven applications, agents, assistants, vast training datasets, the models themselves, and supporting infrastructure—we’re continually updating our security controls, guided by Google’s Secure AI Framework (SAIF). To address the new challenges, we’ve expanded our traditional security approaches to cover the new attack surfaces by scanning for more types of vulnerabilities, analyzing more intel, preparing to respond to new kinds of incidents, and continually testing our controls in novel ways to strengthen our security posture. This white paper is one of a series describing our approaches to implementing Google’s SAIF. In this paper we explain how we’re applying security assurance—a cross functional effort aiming to achieve high confidence that our security features, practices, procedures, controls, and architecture accurately mediate and enforce our security policies—to AI development. Security assurance efforts help to both ensure the continued security of our AI products and address relevant policy requirements. Just as quality assurance (QA) in manufacturing meticulously examines finished products and the processes that create them to ensure they meet quality standards, security assurance serves a complementary role to the broader security efforts within an organization. Those broader security efforts span the design, implementation, and operation of controls to create secure software products; security assurance focuses on verifying and improving those efforts. Security assurance identifies gaps, weaknesses, and areas where controls may not be operating as intended, to drive continuous improvement across all security domains. It’s two-party review in action—security assurance helps build confidence that the software was not just built securely, but continues to run securely. Since AI systems—those that use AI models for reasoning—present a combination of well understood and novel risks, AI technologies require a combination of both common and novel controls. No matter how strong these controls are, a security assurance program is essential to ensure they are working as intended and that they are continually updated and improved. The paper opens with an overview of security assurance functions, covering several teams and capabilities that work together to ensure security controls are working across any software development lifecycle, including the AI development lifecycle. In particular, we focus on four functions—Red Teaming, Vulnerability Management, Detection & Response, and Threat Intelligence, and how those work together to address issues through Remediation. We then describe the features specific to AI that affect assurance functions and give examples of how we’re adapting our approaches to account for AI-specific technologies and risks. We also include guidance for organizations considering creating their own AI assurance programs, including best practices for assuring training data, models, the AI software supply chain, and product integrations. We intend this paper to be useful for a broad technical audience, including both assurance specialists who are new to AI technologies, and AI developers who are new to assurance practices. View details Toward Community- Led Evaluations of Text-to-Image AI Representations of Disability, Health, and Accessibility Cindy Bennett Shaun Kane Christina Harrington Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization (EAAMO) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Responsible AI advocates for user evaluations, particularly when concerning people with disabilities, health conditions, and accessibility needs ( DHA)–wide- ranging but umbrellaed sociodemograph- ics. However, community- centered text- to- image AI’s ( T2I) evaluations are often researcher- led, situating evaluators as consumers. We instead recruited 21 people with diverse DHA to evaluate T2I by writing and editing their own T2I prompts with their preferred language and topics, in a method mirroring everyday use. We contribute user- generated terminology categories which inform future research and data collections, necessary for developing authentic scaled evaluations. We additionally surface yet- discussed DHA AI harms intersecting race and class, and participants shared harm impacts they experienced as image- creator evaluators. To this end, we demonstrate that prompt engineering– proposed as a misrepresentation mitigation– was largely ineffective at improving DHA representations. We discuss the importance of evaluator agency to increase ecological validity in community- centered evaluations, and opportunities to research iterative prompting as an evaluation technique. View details Filtered Vector Search: State-of-the-art and Research Opportunities Yannis Papakonstantinou Anastasia Ailamaki Yannis Chronis Helena Caminal Fatma Ozcan 2025 Preview Preview abstract The integration of vector search into databases, driven by advancements in embedding models, semantic search, and Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), enables powerful combined querying of structured and unstructured data. This paper focuses on filtered vector search (FVS), a core operation where relational predicates restrict the dataset before or during the vector similarity search (top-k). While approximate near neighbor (ANN) indices are commonly used to accelerate vector search by trading latency for recall, the addition of filters complicates performance optimization and makes achieving stable, declarative recall guarantees challenging. Filters alter the effective dataset size and distribution, impacting the search effort required. We discuss the primary FVS execution strategies – pre-filtering, post-filtering, and inline-filtering – whose efficiencies depend on factors like filter selectivity, cardinality, and data correlation. We review existing approaches that modify index structures and search algorithms (e.g., iterative post-filtering, filter-aware index traversal) to enhance FVS performance. This tutorial provides a comprehensive overview of filtered vector search, discussing its use cases, classifying current solutions and their trade-offs, and highlighting crucial research challenges and future directions for developing efficient and accurate FVS systems. View details ExfilState: Automated Discovery of Timer-Free Cache Side Channels on ARM CPUs Fabian Thomas Michael Torres Daniel Moghimi Michael Schwarz ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) (2025) (to appear) Preview DroidCCT: Cryptographic Compliance Test via Trillion-Scale Measurement Daniel Moghimi Rémi Audebert Pedro Barbosa Borbala Benko Elie Bursztein Alex (Mac) Mihai László Siroki Kurt Thomas Catherine Vlasov Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC) (2025) (to appear) Preview Silent Data Corruption by 10× Test Escapes Threatens Reliable Computing Subhasish Mitra Bharath Parthasarathy Subho Banerjee Rama Govindaraju Peter Hochschild Eric Liu Mike Fuller Martin Dixon Parthasarathy Ranganathan IEEE Design & Test, 42, Issue 6 (2025), pp. 40-53 Preview Preview abstract Summary: Silent Data Corruption by 10x Test Escapes Threatens Reliable Computing" highlights a critical issue: manufacturing defects, dubbed "test escapes," are evading current testing methods at an alarming rate, ten times higher than industry targets. These defects lead to Silent Data Corruption (SDC), where applications produce incorrect outputs without error indications, costing companies significantly in debugging, data recovery, and service disruptions. The paper proposes a three-pronged approach: quick diagnosis of defective chips directly from system-level behaviors, in-field detection using advanced testing and error detection techniques like CASP, and new, rigorous test experiments to validate these solutions and improve manufacturing testing practices. View details Generative Quantum Advantage for Classical and Quantum Problems Robert Huang Michael Broughton Norhan Eassa Hartmut Neven Ryan Babbush Jarrod McClean arXiv:2509.09033 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent breakthroughs in generative machine learning, powered by massive computational resources, have demonstrated unprecedented human-like capabilities. While beyond-classical quantum experiments can generate samples from classically intractable distributions, their complexity has thwarted all efforts toward efficient learning. This challenge has hindered demonstrations of generative quantum advantage: the ability of quantum computers to learn and generate desired outputs substantially better than classical computers. We resolve this challenge by introducing families of generative quantum models that are hard to simulate classically, are efficiently trainable, exhibit no barren plateaus or proliferating local minima, and can learn to generate distributions beyond the reach of classical computers. Using a 68-qubit superconducting quantum processor, we demonstrate these capabilities in two scenarios: learning classically intractable probability distributions and learning quantum circuits for accelerated physical simulation. Our results establish that both learning and sampling can be performed efficiently in the beyond-classical regime, opening new possibilities for quantum-enhanced generative models with provable advantage. View details Deep Multi-modal Species Occupancy Modeling Timm Haucke Lauren Harrell Yunyi Shen Levente Klein David Rolnick Lauren Gillespie Sara Beery bioRxiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Occupancy models are tools for modeling the relationship between habitat and species occurrence while accounting for the fact that species may still be present even if not detected. The types of environmental variables typically used for characterizing habitats in such ecological models, such as precipitation or tree cover, are frequently of low spatial resolution, with a single value for a spatial pixel size of, e.g., 1km2. This spatial scale fails to capture the nuances of micro-habitat conditions that can strongly influence species presence, and additionally, as many of these are derived from satellite data, there are aspects of the environment they cannot capture, such as the structure of vegetation below the forest canopy. We propose to combine high-resolution satellite and ground-level imagery to produce multi-modal environmental features that better capture micro-habitat conditions, and incorporate these multi-modal features into hierarchical Bayesian species occupancy models. We leverage pre-trained deep learning models to flexibly capture relevant information directly from raw imagery, in contrast to traditional approaches which rely on derived and/or hand-crafted sets of ecosystem covariates. We implement deep multi-modal species occupancy modeling using a new open-source Python package for ecological modeling, designed for bridging machine learning and statistical ecology. We test our method under a strict evaluation protocol on 16 mammal species across thousands of camera traps in Snapshot USA surveys, and find that multi-modal features substantially enhance predictive power compared to traditional environmental variables alone. Our results not only highlight the predictive value and complementarity of in-situ samples, but also make the case for more closely integrating deep learning models and traditional statistical ecological models. View details “Does the cafe entrance look accessible? Where is the door?” Towards Geospatial AI Agents for Visual Inquiries Jon Froehlich Jared Hwang Zeyu Wang John S. O'Meara Xia Su William Huang Yang Zhang Alex Fiannaca Philip Q Nelson Shaun Kane ICCV'25 Workshop "Vision Foundation Models and Generative AI for Accessibility: Challenges and Opportunities" (2025) Preview Preview abstract Interactive digital maps have revolutionized how people travel and learn about the world; however, they rely on preexisting structured data in GIS databases (e.g., road networks, POI indices), limiting their ability to address geovisual questions related to what the world looks like. We introduce our vision for Geo-Visual Agents—multimodal AI agents capable of understanding and responding to nuanced visual-spatial inquiries about the world by analyzing large-scale repositories of geospatial images, including streetscapes (e.g., Google Street View), place-based photos (e.g., TripAdvisor, Yelp), and aerial imagery (e.g., satellite photos) combined with traditional GIS data sources. We define our vision, describe sensing and interaction approaches, provide three exemplars, and enumerate key challenges and opportunities for future work. View details 14 15 16 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
