 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 481 - 495 of 676 publications chip template Remove System Characterization of Dispersive Readout in Superconducting Qubits Daniel Sank Alex Opremcak Andreas Bengtsson Mostafa Khezri Jimmy Chen Ofer Naaman Alexander Korotkov Physical Review Applied, 23 (2025), pp. 024055 Preview Preview abstract Designing quantum systems with the measurement speed and accuracy needed for quantum error correction using superconducting qubits requires iterative design and test informed by accurate models and characterization tools. We introduce a single protocol, with few prerequisite calibrations, which measures the dispersive shift, resonator linewidth, and drive power used in the dispersive readout of superconducting qubits. We find that the resonator linewidth is poorly controlled with a factor of 2 between the maximum and minimum measured values, and is likely to require focused attention in future quantum error correction experiments. We also introduce a protocol for measuring the readout system efficiency using the same power levels as are used in typical qubit readout, and without the need to measure the qubit coherence. We routinely run these protocols on chips with tens of qubits, driven by automation software with little human interaction. Using the extracted system parameters, we find that a model based on those parameters predicts the readout signal to noise ratio to within 10% over a device with 54 qubits. View details Spectral Image Tokenizer Carlos Esteves Mohammed Suhail Ameesh Makadia International Conference on Computer Vision (2025) Preview Preview abstract Image tokenizers map images to sequences of discrete tokens, and are a crucial component of autoregressive transformer-based image generation. The tokens are typically associated with spatial locations in the input image, arranged in raster scan order, which is not ideal for autoregressive modeling. In this paper, we propose to tokenize the image spectrum instead, obtained from a discrete wavelet transform (DWT), such that the sequence of tokens represents the image in a coarse-to-fine fashion. Our tokenizer brings several advantages: 1) it leverages that natural images are more compressible at high frequencies, 2) it can take and reconstruct images of different resolutions without retraining, 3) it improves the conditioning for next-token prediction -- instead of conditioning on a partial line-by-line reconstruction of the image, it takes a coarse reconstruction of the full image, 4) it enables partial decoding where the first few generated tokens can reconstruct a coarse version of the image, 5) it enables autoregressive models to be used for image upsampling. We evaluate the tokenizer reconstruction metrics as well as multiscale image generation, text-guided image upsampling and editing. View details Inside-Out: Hidden Factual Knowledge in LLMs Jonathan Herzig Eran Ofek Hadas Orgad Zorik Gekhman Idan Szpektor Roi Reichart Yonatan Belinkov Eyal Ben-David 2025 Preview Preview abstract This work presents a framework for assessing whether large language models (LLMs) encode more factual knowledge in their parameters than what they express in their outputs. While a few studies hint at this possibility, none has clearly defined or demonstrated this phenomenon. We first propose a formal definition of knowledge, quantifying it for a given question as the fraction of correct-incorrect answer pairs where the correct one is ranked higher. This gives rise to external and internal knowledge, depending on the information used to score individual answer candidates: either the model’s observable token-level probabilities or its intermediate computations. Hidden knowledge arises when internal knowledge exceeds external knowledge. We then present a case study, applying this framework to three popular open-weights LLMs in a closed-book QA setup. Our results indicate that: (1) LLMs consistently encode more factual knowledge internally than what they express externally, with an average gap of 40%. (2) Surprisingly, some knowledge is so deeply hidden that a model can internally know an answer perfectly, yet fail to generate it even once, despite large-scale repeated sampling of 1,000 answers. This reveals fundamental limitations in the generation capabilities of LLMs, which (3) puts a practical constraint on scaling test-time compute via repeated answer sampling in closed-book QA: significant performance improvements remain inaccessible because some answers are practically never sampled, yet if they were, we would be guaranteed to rank them first. View details Lower Bounds in Differentially Private Sublinear-time Algorithms Jeremiah M Blocki Hendrik Fichtenberger Elena Grigorescu Tamalika Mukherjee 2025 Preview Preview abstract Differential privacy and sublinear algorithms are both rapidly emerging algorithmic themes in times of big data analysis. Yet, research has so far concentrated on one or the other. The existence of private algorithms and, separately, sublinear algorithms for many problems poses the question of differential privacy and sublinear time can be combined. Little is known so far, especially when it comes to hardness results on these algorithms. In this paper, we initiate the study of lower bounds for differentially private, sublinear time algorithms. Our main result is the incompatibility of both in the general case. In particular, we prove that a simple problem based on one-way marginals yiels both, a differentially private algorithm and a sublinear time algorithm, but a substantially sublinear time, differentially private algorithm does not exist. View details Titans: Learning to Memorize at Test Time Vahab Mirrokni Ali Behrouz Peilin Zhong 2025 Preview Preview abstract Over more than a decade there has been an extensive research effort of how effectively utilize recurrent models and attentions. While recurrent models aim to compress the data into a fixed-size memory (called hidden state), attention allows attending to the entire context window, capturing the direct dependencies of all tokens. This more accurate modeling of dependencies, however, comes with a quadratic cost, limiting the model to a fixed-length context. We present a new neural long-term memory module that learns to memorize historical context and helps an attention to attend to the current context while utilizing long past information. We show that this neural memory has the advantage of a fast parallelizable training while maintaining a fast inference. From a memory perspective, we argue that attention due to its limited context but accurate dependency modeling performs as a short-term memory, while neural memory due to its ability to memorize the data, acts as a long-term, more persistent, memory. Based on these two modules, we introduce a new family of architectures, called Titans, and present three variants to address how one can effectively incorporate memory into this architecture. Our experimental results on language modeling tasks show that Titans are more effective than Transformers and recent modern linear recurrent models. They further can \emph{effectively} scale to larger than 2M context window size with higher accuracy in needle-in-haystack tasks compared to baselines. View details A practical guide to transitioning to MSLs Jeff Vander Stoep Alex Rebert ACM Queue, Volume 23 , Issue 5 (2025) Preview Preview abstract For decades, memory safety vulnerabilities have been a stubborn and seemingly unavoidable risk of systems software development. But that long-held view is now shifting. Driven by the success of memory-safe languages, and reinforced by calls to action from government agencies, the industry is recognizing that taking on this risk is no longer necessary. Vulnerabilities, once an inevitability of systems programming, should increasingly be seen as a deliberate choice. Fortunately, data demonstrates that making a better choice does not require daunting multi-year rewrites of existing codebases. We can dramatically improve security by incrementally shifting the development of just new code to memory safe languages. And if these vulnerabilities can be avoided with low impact on other development goals, then choosing to introduce new ones should increasingly be considered unacceptable, and our goal should be for vulnerabilities to become increasingly impossible to introduce. As James Clear says, “You do not rise to the level of your goals, you fall to the level of your systems.” A goal without a system is merely a wish. Transitioning even new development within a codebase to a new language is a complex undertaking, but it is solvable. This article lays out an empirically effective system, covering not only why this shift is so powerful but also a practical, staged process you can use to make it happen. View details Practical Security in Production: Hardening C++ Standard Library at Massive Scale Louis Dionne Max Shavrick Alex Rebert Konstantin Varlamov ACM Queue, Volume 23 , Issue 5 (2025) Preview Preview abstract We document the work required to roll out Hardened Libc++ across Google, including collaboration with Apple on the implementation. We discuss the requirements for hardening, the benefits of rolling out to production instead of pre-production environments. Lastly, we discuss the bugs found, the performance work required to make such a change, and the lasting impact. View details Bipartite Ranking From Multiple Labels: On Loss Versus Label Aggregation Michal Lukasik Lin Chen Hari Narasimhan Aditya Menon Wittawat Jitkrittum Felix Yu Sashank Reddi Thomas Fu Mohammad "Hossein" Bateni Sanjiv Kumar 2025 Preview Preview abstract Bipartite ranking is a fundamental supervised learning problem, with the goal of learning a ranking over instances with maximal Area Under the ROC Curve (AUC) against a single binary target label. However, one may often observe multiple binary target labels, e.g., from distinct human annotators. How can one synthesize such labels into a single coherent ranking? In this work, we formally analyze two approaches to this problem -- loss aggregation and label aggregation -- by characterizing their Bayes-optimal solutions. We show that while both approaches can yield Pareto-optimal solutions, loss aggregation can exhibit label dictatorship: one can inadvertently (and undesirably) favor one label over others. This suggests that label aggregation can be preferable to loss aggregation, which we empirically verify. View details Scalable Private Partition Selection via Adaptive Weighting Justin Y. Chen Vincent Cohen-Addad Alessandro Epasto Morteza Zadimoghaddam ICML 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract In the differentially private partition selection problem (a.k.a. private set union, private key discovery), users hold subsets of items from an unbounded universe. The goal is to output as many items as possible from the union of the users' sets while maintaining user-level differential privacy. Solutions to this problem are a core building block for many privacy-preserving ML applications including vocabulary extraction in a private corpus, computing statistics over categorical data and learning embeddings over user-provided items. We propose an algorithm for this problem, MaxAdaptiveDegree(MAD), which adaptively reroutes weight from items with weight far above the threshold needed for privacy to items with smaller weight, thereby increasing the probability that less frequent items are output. Our algorithm can be efficiently implemented in massively parallel computation systems allowing scalability to very large datasets. We prove that our algorithm stochastically dominates the standard parallel algorithm for this problem. We also develop a two-round version of our algorithm, MAD2R, where results of the computation in the first round are used to bias the weighting in the second round to maximize the number of items output. In experiments, our algorithms provide the best results across the board among parallel algorithms and scale to datasets with hundreds of billions of items, up to three orders of magnitude larger than those analyzed by prior sequential algorithms. View details Of Dice and Games: A Theory of Generalized Boosting Marco Bressan Nataly Brukhim Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi Emmanuel Esposito Yishay Mansour Shay Moran Maximilian Thiessen COLT (2025) Preview Preview abstract Cost-sensitive loss functions are crucial in many real-world prediction problems, where different types of errors are penalized differently; for example, in medical diagnosis, a false negative prediction can lead to severe consequences. However, traditional PAC learning theory has mostly focused on the symmetric 0-1 loss, leaving cost-sensitive losses largely unaddressed. In this work, we extend the celebrated theory of boosting to incorporate both cost-sensitive and multi-objective losses. Cost-sensitive losses assign costs to the entries of a confusion matrix, and are used to control the sum of prediction errors accounting for the cost of each error type. Multi-objective losses, on the other hand, simultaneously track multiple cost-sensitive losses, and are useful when the goal is to satisfy several criteria at once (e.g., minimizing false positives while keeping false negatives below a critical threshold). We develop a comprehensive theory of cost-sensitive and multi-objective boosting, providing a taxonomy of weak learning guarantees that distinguishes which guarantees are trivial (i.e., they can always be achieved), which are boostable (i.e., they imply strong learning), and which are intermediate, implying non-trivial yet not arbitrarily accurate learning. For binary classification, we establish a dichotomy: a weak learning guarantee is either trivial or boostable. In the multiclass setting, we describe a more intricate landscape of intermediate weak learning guarantees. Our characterization relies on a geometric interpretation of boosting, revealing a useful duality between cost-sensitive and multi-objective losses. View details Adaptive data transformations for QaaS Dimitrios Koutsoukos Renato Marroquín Ingo Müller Ana Klimovic (2025) Preview Preview abstract In today’s data-driven landscape, organizations have large amounts of semi-structured data that they want to get quick insights from. Query-as-a-Service (QaaS) systems are ideal for this use case, as the user can query the data in situ without spinning up or maintaining any dedicated infrastructure. However, these systems lack traditional database structures (e.g. indexes) making their cost and latency suboptimal in many cases. As a remedy, we show how QaaS can utilize simple data transformations (transcoding, chunking, sorting) using serverless functions (FaaS) to automatically modify input data based on data characteristics and the incoming queries to improve latency and cost. We envision that a cloud service can act as a middleware between the user and QaaS to adopt such transformations, where customers can opt in and specify their latency/cost budgets. Finally, we evaluate the various trade-offs of these transformations. View details Probably Approximately Precision and Recall Learning Lee Cohen Yishay Mansour Shay Moran Han Shao NeurIPS (2025) Preview Preview abstract \textit{Precision} and \textit{Recall} are foundational metrics in machine learning applications where both accurate predictions and comprehensive coverage are essential, such as in recommender systems and multi-label learning. In these tasks, balancing precision (the proportion of relevant items among those predicted) and recall (the proportion of relevant items successfully predicted) is crucial. A key challenge is that one-sided feedback—where only positive examples are observed during training—is inherent in many practical problems. For instance, in recommender systems like YouTube, training data only consists of songs or videos that a user has actively selected, while unselected items remain unseen. Despite this lack of negative feedback in training, it becomes crucial at test time; for example, in a recommender system, it’s essential to avoid recommending items the user would likely dislike. We introduce a Probably Approximately Correct (PAC) learning framework where each hypothesis is represented by a graph, with edges indicating positive interactions, such as between users and items. This framework subsumes the classical binary and multi-class PAC learning models as well as multi-label learning with partial feedback, where only a single random correct label per example is observed, rather than all correct labels. Our work uncovers a rich statistical and algorithmic landscape, with nuanced boundaries on what can and cannot be learned. Notably, classical methods like Empirical Risk Minimization fail in this setting, even for simple hypothesis classes with only two hypotheses. To address these challenges, we develop novel algorithms that learn exclusively from positive data, effectively minimizing both precision and recall losses. Specifically, in the realizable setting, we design algorithms that achieve optimal sample complexity guarantees. In the agnostic case, we show that it is impossible to achieve additive error guarantees (i.e., additive regret)—as is standard in PAC learning—and instead obtain meaningful multiplicative approximations. View details Regret Bounds for Adversarial Contextual Bandits with General Function Approximation and Delayed Feedback Orin Levy Liad Erez Alon Cohen Yishay Mansour NeurIPS (2025) Preview Preview abstract We present regret minimization algorithms for the contextual multi-armed bandit (CMAB) problem over $K$ actions in the presence of delayed feedback, a scenario where loss observations arrive with delays chosen by an adversary. As a preliminary result, assuming direct access to a finite policy class $\Pi$ we establish an optimal expected regret bound of $ O (\sqrt{KT \log |\Pi|} + \sqrt{D \log |\Pi|)} $ where $D$ is the sum of delays. For our main contribution, we study the general function approximation setting over a (possibly infinite) contextual loss function class $ \mathcal{F} $ with access to an online least-square regression oracle $\mathcal{O}$ over $\mathcal{F}$. In this setting, we achieve an expected regret bound of $O(\sqrt{KT\mathcal{R}_T(\mathcal{O})} + \sqrt{ d_{\max} D \beta})$ assuming FIFO order, where $d_{\max}$ is the maximal delay, $\mathcal{R}_T(\mathcal{O})$ is an upper bound on the oracle's regret and $\beta$ is a stability parameter associated with the oracle. We complement this general result by presenting a novel stability analysis of a Hedge-based version of Vovk's aggregating forecaster as an oracle implementation for least-square regression over a finite function class $\mathcal{F}$ and show that its stability parameter $\beta$ is bounded by $\log |\F|$, resulting in an expected regret bound of $O(\sqrt{KT \log |\mathcal{F}|} + \sqrt{d_{\max} D \log |\mathcal{F}|})$ which is a $\sqrt{d_{\max}}$ factor away from the lower bound of $\Omega(\sqrt{KT \log |\mathcal{F}|} + \sqrt{D \log |\mathcal{F}|})$ that we also present. View details Approximate Optimal Mechanism Design via the Interim Relaxation Alex Psomas Marios Mertzanidis Divyarthi Mohan Kshipra Bhawalkar Lane NeurIPS (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study revenue maximization for agents with additive preferences, subject to downward-closed constraints on the set of feasible allocations. In seminal work, Alaei [Ala14] introduced a powerful multi-to-single agent reduction based on an ex-ante relaxation of the multi-agent problem. This reduction employs a rounding procedure which is an online contention resolution scheme (OCRS) in disguise, a now widely-used method for rounding fractional solutions in online Bayesian and stochastic optimization problems. In this paper, we leverage our vantage point, 10 years after the work of Alaei, with a rich OCRS toolkit and modern approaches to analyzing multi-agent mechanisms; we introduce a general framework for designing non-sequential and sequential multi-agent, revenue-maximizing mechanisms, capturing a wide variety of problems Alaei’s framework could not address. Our framework uses an interim relaxation, that is rounded to a feasible mechanism using what we call a two-level OCRS, which allows for some structured dependence between the activation of its input elements. For a wide family of constraints, we can construct such schemes using existing OCRSs as a black box; for other constraints, such as knapsack, we construct such schemes from scratch. We demonstrate numerous applications of our framework, including a sequential mechanism that guarantees a 2e/(e−1) ≈ 3.16 approximation to the optimal revenue for the case of additive agents subject to matroid feasibility constraints. The simplicity of our developed two-level CRSs and OCRSs highlights the strength of our framework: even with a simple analysis, it yields state-of-the-art approximation guarantees across a wide range of settings. Finally, we show how it naturally extends to multi-parameter procurement auctions. View details Preference Adaptive and Sequential Text-to-Image Generation Ofir Nabati Guy Tennenholtz Chih-wei Hsu Moonkyung Ryu Deepak Ramachandran Yinlam Chow Sean Li Craig Boutilier 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-25), Vancouver (2025) (2025), pp. 45362-45394 Preview Preview abstract We address the problem of interactive text-toimage (T2I) generation, designing a reinforcement learning (RL) agent which iteratively improves a set of generated images for a user through a sequence of prompt expansions. Using human raters, we create a novel dataset of sequential preferences, which we leverage, together with largescale open-source (non-sequential) datasets. We construct user-preference and user-choice models using an EM strategy and identify varyinguser preference types. We then leverage a large multimodal language model (LMM) and a valuebased RL approach to suggest an adaptive and diverse slate of prompt expansions to the user. Our Preference Adaptive and Sequential Text-toimage Agent (PASTA) extends T2I models with adaptive multi-turn capabilities, fostering collaborative co-creation and addressing uncertainty or underspecification in a user’s intent. We evaluate PASTA using human raters, showing significant improvement compared to baseline methods. We also open-source our sequential rater dataset and simulated user-rater interactions to support future research in user-centric multi-turn T2I systems. View details 33 34 35 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
