 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 451 - 465 of 676 publications chip template Remove SETS: Leveraging Self-Verification and Self-Correction for Improved Test-Time Scaling Jie Ren Sercan Arik Xinyun Chen Jiefeng Chen Chengrun Yang Ruoxi Sun Jinsung Yoon Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent advancements in Large Language Models (LLMs) have created new opportunities to enhance performance on complex reasoning tasks by leveraging test-time computation. However, existing scaling methods have key limitations: parallel methods like repeated sampling are often inefficient and quickly saturate, while sequential methods like SELF-REFINE struggle to improve after a few rounds. Although combining these approaches shows promise, current methods require fine-tuned reward and revision models. This paper proposes Self-Enhanced Test-Time Scaling (SETS), a simple yet effective approach that overcomes these limitations by strategically combining parallel and sequential techniques and fully leveraging LLMs' self-improvement abilities. SETS exploits the inherent self-verification and self-correction capabilities of LLMs, unifying sampling, verification, and correction within a single framework. This facilitates efficient and scalable test-time computation for enhanced performance on complex tasks without any model training. Our comprehensive experimental results on challenging benchmarks spanning planning, reasoning, math, and coding demonstrate that SETS achieves significant performance improvements and more advantageous test-time scaling behavior than the alternatives. View details Communication-Efficient Language Model Training Scales Reliably and Robustly: Scaling Laws for DiLoCo Zachary Charles Gabriel Teston Lucio Dery Keith Rush Nova Fallen Zachary Garrett Arthur Szlam Arthur Douillard (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract As we scale to more massive machine learning models, the frequent synchronization demands inherent in data-parallel approaches create significant slowdowns, posing a critical challenge to further scaling. Recent work develops an approach (DiLoCo) that relaxes synchronization demands without compromising model quality. However, these works do not carefully analyze how DiLoCo's behavior changes with model size. In this work, we study the scaling law behavior of DiLoCo when training LLMs under a fixed compute budget. We focus on how algorithmic factors, including number of model replicas, hyperparameters, and token budget affect training in ways that can be accurately predicted via scaling laws. We find that DiLoCo scales both predictably and robustly with model size. When well-tuned, DiLoCo scales better than data-parallel training with model size, and can outperform data-parallel training even at small model sizes. Our results showcase a more general set of benefits of DiLoCo than previously documented, including increased optimal batch sizes, improved downstream generalization with scale, and improved evaluation loss for a fixed token budget. View details TUMIX: Augmenting LLM Reasoning with a Dynamic Tool-Use Mixture Chuchu Fan Tomas Pfister Jiefeng Chen Na Li Chi Wang Ji Yin Yongchao Chen Rui Meng Jinsung Yoon 2025 Preview Preview abstract Integrating tools like Code Interpreter and Search has significantly improved Large Language Models (LLMs) reasoning, as shown by leading models such as OpenAI's ChatGPT Agent, Google's Gemini-Pro, and XAI's Grok4. However, the research community still lacks practical guidance on fully leveraging these tools. The main challenge lies in finding an effective method to fully exploit the benefits of textual reasoning, coding, and searching when facing distinctive questions. To address this, we propose an ensemble-based framework that runs multiple agents in parallel, each exploring different answer paths with distinct tool-use strategies. Agents iteratively share and refine their answers by considering the original question and previous responses. Our proposed method Tool-Use Mixture (TUMIX) achieves significant gains over other representative tool-augmented test-time scaling methods such as Self-MoA, Symbolic-MoE, DEI, SciMaster, and GSA. With near equal inference costs, TUMIX delivers an average +3.55% accuracy improvement over the best baseline on Gemini-2.5-Pro and Gemini-2.5-Flash across key reasoning benchmarks (HLE, GPQA, AIME 24&25), where coding and search can effectively support reasoning when applied properly. We find that agent diversity and quality are crucial, and can be further improved by querying LLMs to automatically optimize agent designs. To reduce costs, TUMIX halts refinement once sufficient confidence is reached, preserving nearly the same performance at just 49% of the inference cost. With further scaling, TUMIX can achieve even higher performance, though at substantially greater cost. View details EI-Lite: Electrical Impedance Sensing for Micro-gesture Recognition and Pinch Force Estimation Junyi Zhu Tianyu Xu Jiayu Wang Emily Guan JaeYoung Moon Stiven Morvan D Shin Andrea Colaco stefanie mueller Karan Ahuja Yiyue Luo Ishan Chatterjee Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2025), pp. 1-14 Preview Preview abstract Micro-gesture recognition and fine-grain pinch press enables intuitive and discreet control of devices, offering significant potential for enhancing human-computer interaction (HCI). In this paper, we present EI-Lite, a lightweight wrist-worn electrical impedance sensing device for micro-gesture recognition and continuous pinch force estimation. We elicit an optimal and simplified device architecture through an ablation study on electrode placement with 13 users, and implement the elicited designs through 3D printing. We capture data on 15 participants on (1) six common micro-gestures (plus idle state) and (2) index finger pinch forces, then develop machine learning models that interpret the impedance signals generated by these micro-gestures and pinch forces. Our system is capable of accurate recognition of micro-gesture events (96.33% accuracy), as well as continuously estimating the pinch force of the index finger in physical units (Newton), with the mean-squared error (MSE) of 0.3071 (or mean-force-variance of 0.55 Newtons) over 15 participants. Finally, we demonstrate EI-Lite’s applicability via three applications in AR/VR, gaming, and assistive technologies. View details The FLuid Allocation of Surface Code Qubits (FLASQ) Cost Model for Early Fault-Tolerant Quantum Algorithms Bill Huggins Tanuj Khattar Amanda Xu Matthew Harrigan Christopher Kang Guang Hao Low Austin Fowler Nicholas Rubin Ryan Babbush arXiv:2511.08508 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Holistic resource estimates are essential for guiding the development of fault-tolerant quantum algorithms and the computers they will run on. This is particularly true when we focus on highly-constrained early fault-tolerant devices. Many attempts to optimize algorithms for early fault-tolerance focus on simple metrics, such as the circuit depth or T-count. These metrics fail to capture critical overheads, such as the spacetime cost of Clifford operations and routing, or miss they key optimizations. We propose the FLuid Allocation of Surface code Qubits (FLASQ) cost model, tailored for architectures that use a two-dimensional lattice of qubits to implement the two-dimensional surface code. FLASQ abstracts away the complexity of routing by assuming that ancilla space and time can be fluidly rearranged, allowing for the tractable estimation of spacetime volume while still capturing important details neglected by simpler approaches. At the same time, it enforces constraints imposed by the circuit's measurement depth and the processor's reaction time. We apply FLASQ to analyze the cost of a standard two-dimensional lattice model simulation, finding that modern advances (such as magic state cultivation and the combination of quantum error correction and mitigation) reduce both the time and space required for this task by an order of magnitude compared with previous estimates. We also analyze the Hamming weight phasing approach to synthesizing parallel rotations, revealing that despite its low T-count, the overhead from imposing a 2D layout and from its use of additional ancilla qubits will make it challenging to benefit from in early fault-tolerance. We hope that the FLASQ cost model will help to better align early fault-tolerant algorithmic design with actual hardware realization costs without demanding excessive knowledge of quantum error correction from quantum algorithmists. View details Democratizing ML for Enterprise Security: A Self-Sustained Attack Detection Framework Sadegh Momeni Ge Zhang Birkett Huber Hamza Harkous Sam Lipton Benoit Seguin Yanis Pavlidis Conference on Applied Machine Learning in Information Security (2025) Preview Preview abstract Despite advancements in machine learning for security, rule-based detection remains prevalent in Security Operations Centers due to the resource intensiveness and skill gap associated with ML solutions. While traditional rule-based methods offer efficiency, their rigidity leads to high false positives or negatives and requires continuous manual maintenance. This paper proposes a novel, two-stage hybrid framework to democratize ML-based threat detection. The first stage employs intentionally loose YARA rules for coarse-grained filtering, optimized for high recall. The second stage utilizes an ML classifier to filter out false positives from the first stage's output. To overcome data scarcity, the system leverages Simula, a seedless synthetic data generation framework, enabling security analysts to create high-quality training datasets without extensive data science expertise or pre-labeled examples. A continuous feedback loop incorporates real-time investigation results to adaptively tune the ML model, preventing rule degradation. This proposed model with active learning has been rigorously tested for a prolonged time in a production environment spanning tens of thousands of systems. The system handles initial raw log volumes often reaching 250 billion events per day, significantly reducing them through filtering and ML inference to a handful of daily tickets for human investigation. Live experiments over an extended timeline demonstrate a general improvement in the model's precision over time due to the active learning feature. This approach offers a self-sustained, low-overhead, and low-maintenance solution, allowing security professionals to guide model learning as expert ``teachers''. View details Evaluating the Robustness of a Production Malware Detection System to Transferable Adversarial Attacks Milad Nasr Yanick Fratantonio Luca Invernizzi Ange Albertini Loua Farah Alexandre Petit-Bianco Elie Bursztein Andreas Terzis Kurt Thomas Nicholas Carlini ACM Conference on Computer and Communications Security (CCS) (2025) Preview Preview abstract As deep learning models become widely deployed as components within larger production systems, their individual shortcomings can create system-level vulnerabilities with real-world impact. This paper studies how adversarial attacks targeting an ML component can degrade or bypass an entire production-grade malware detection system, performing a case study analysis of Gmail’s pipeline where file-type identification relies on a ML model. The malware detection pipeline in use by Gmail contains a machine learning model that routes each potential malware sample to a specialized malware classifier to improve accuracy and performance. This model, called Magika, has been open sourced. By designing adversarial examples that fool Magika, we can cause the production malware service to incorrectly route malware to an unsuitable malware detector thereby increasing our chance of evading detection. Specifically, by changing just 13 bytes of a malware sample, we can successfully evade Magika in 90% of cases and thereby allow us to send malware files over Gmail. We then turn our attention to defenses, and develop an approach to mitigate the severity of these types of attacks. For our defended production model, a highly resourced adversary requires 50 bytes to achieve just a 20% attack success rate. We implement this defense, and, thanks to a collaboration with Google engineers, it has already been deployed in production for the Gmail classifier. View details Agent-Initated Interaction in Phone UI Automation Noam Kahlon Guy Rom Tal Efros Filippo Galgani Omri Berkovitch Sapir Caduri Will Bishop Oriana Riva Ido Dagan Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2391–2400 Preview Preview abstract Phone automation agents aim to autonomously perform a given natural-language user request, such as scheduling appointments or booking a hotel. While much research effort has been devoted to screen understanding and action planning, complex tasks often necessitate user interaction for successful completion. Aligning the agent with the user's expectations is crucial for building trust and enabling personalized experiences. This requires the agent to proactively engage the user when necessary, avoiding actions that violate their preferences while refraining from unnecessary questions where a default action is expected. We argue that such subtle agent-initiated interaction with the user deserves focused research attention. To promote such research, this paper introduces a task formulation for detecting the need for user interaction and generating appropriate messages. We thoroughly define the task, including aspects like interaction timing and the scope of the agent's autonomy. Using this definition, we derived annotation guidelines and created a diverse dataset for the task, leveraging an existing UI automation dataset. We tested several text-based and multimodal baseline models for the task, finding that it is very challenging for current LLMs. We suggest that our task formulation, dataset, baseline models and analysis will be valuable for future UI automation research, specifically in addressing this crucial yet often overlooked aspect of agent-initiated interaction. This work provides a needed foundation to allow personalized agents to properly engage the user when needed, within the context of phone UI automation. View details Safe Coding: Rigorous Modular Reasoning about Software Safety Christoph Kern Queue, 23(5) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Many persistent and dangerous software vulnerabilities, including memory safety violations and code injection, arise from a common root cause: Developers inadvertently violate the implicit safety preconditions of widely-used programming constructs. These preconditions—such as pointer validity, array-access bounds, and the trustworthy provenance of code fragments to be evaluated as SQL, HTML, or JavaScript—are traditionally the developer's responsibility to ensure. In complex systems, meeting these obligations often relies on non-local, whole-program invariants that are notoriously difficult to reason about correctly, leading to vulnerabilities that are difficult to detect after the fact. This article introduces Safe Coding, a collection of software design patterns and practices designed to cost-effectively provide a high degree of assurance against entire classes of such vulnerabilities. The core principle of Safe Coding is to shift responsibility for safety from individual developers to the programming language, software libraries, and frameworks. This is achieved by systematically eliminating the direct use of risky operations—those with complex safety preconditions—in application code. Instead, these operations are encapsulated within safe abstractions: modules with public APIs that are safe by design, whose implementations fully ensure all module-internal safety preconditions through a combination of local runtime checks and by elevating safety preconditions into type invariants. Safe Coding facilitates a modular and compositional approach to whole-program safety: Difficult reasoning is localized to the implementation of safe abstractions, which undergo focused expert scrutiny. The composition of these abstractions with the majority of the codebase (which is kept free of risky operations) is then automatically verified by the language’s type checker. This form of compositional reasoning, drawing from patterns used in formal software verification, can be viewed as a semi-formal approach that balances rigor with broad applicability to large industrial codebases. We discuss the successful application of these practices at Google, where they have nearly eliminated vulnerabilities such as Cross-Site Scripting (XSS) and SQL injection, and their critical role in ensuring memory safety in Rust, collectively demonstrating a favorable cost-assurance tradeoff for achieving software safety at scale. View details A Grammar of Data Analysis Xunmo Yang Taylor Pospisil Omkar Muralidharan Dennis Sun arxiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper outlines a grammar of data analysis, as distinct from grammars of data manipulation. The primitives of this grammar are metrics and dimensions. We describe a Python implementation of this grammar called Meterstick, which is agnostic to the underlying data source, which may be a DataFrame or a SQL database. View details CoDA: Agentic Systems for Collaborative Data Visualization Sercan Arik Misha Sra Tomas Pfister Zichen Chen Jiefeng Chen Jinsung Yoon 2025 Preview Preview abstract Automating data visualization from natural language is crucial for data science, yet current systems struggle with complex, multi-file datasets and iterative refinement. Existing approaches, including simple single- or multi-agent systems, often oversimplify the task, focusing on initial query parsing while failing to robustly manage data complexity, code errors, or final visualization quality. In this paper, we reframe this challenge as a collaborative multi-agent problem. We introduce CoDA, a multi-agent system that employs specialized LLM agents for metadata analysis, task planning, code generation, and iterative reflection. We formalize this pipeline, demonstrating how metadata-focused analysis bypasses token limits and quality-driven refinement ensures robustness. Extensive evaluations show CoDA achieves substantial accuracy gains, outperforming competitive baselines by up to 49.0%. This work advocates that future visualization automation should evolve from isolated code generation to integrated, collaborative agentic workflows. View details VQA Training Sets are Self-play Environments for Generating Few-shot Pools Victor Carbune Oriana Riva Jasper Uijlings Tautvydas Misiunas Hassan Mansoor ACL 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large-language models and large-vision models are increasingly capable of solving compositional reasoning tasks, as measured by breakthroughs in visual-question answering benchmarks. However, state-of-the-art solutions often involve careful construction of large pre-training and fine-tuning datasets, which can be expensive. The use of external tools, whether other ML models, search engines, or APIs, can significantly improve performance by breaking down high-level reasoning questions into sub-questions that are answerable by individual tools, but this approach has similar dataset construction costs to teach fine-tuned models how to use the available tools. We propose a technique in which existing training sets can be directly used for constructing computational environments with task metrics as rewards. This enables a model to autonomously teach itself to use itself or another model as a tool. By doing so, we augment training sets by integrating external signals. The proposed method starts with zero-shot prompts and iteratively refines them by selecting few-shot examples that maximize the task metric on the training set. Our experiments showcase how Gemini learns how to use itself, or another smaller and specialized model such as ScreenAI, to iteratively improve performance on training sets. Our approach successfully generalizes and improves upon zeroshot performance on charts, infographics, and document visual question-answering datasets. View details Optimization by Decoded Quantum Interferometry Stephen Jordan Noah Shutty Mary Wootters Adam Zalcman Alexander Schmidhuber Robbie King Sergei Isakov Tanuj Khattar Ryan Babbush Nature, 646 (2025), pp. 831-836 Preview Preview abstract Achieving superpolynomial speedups for optimization has long been a central goal for quantum algorithms. Here we introduce Decoded Quantum Interferometry (DQI), a quantum algorithm that uses the quantum Fourier transform to reduce optimization problems to decoding problems. For approximating optimal polynomial fits over finite fields, DQI achieves a superpolynomial speedup over known classical algorithms. The speedup arises because the problem's algebraic structure is reflected in the decoding problem, which can be solved efficiently. We then investigate whether this approach can achieve speedup for optimization problems that lack algebraic structure but have sparse clauses. These problems reduce to decoding LDPC codes, for which powerful decoders are known. To test this, we construct a max-XORSAT instance where DQI finds an approximate optimum significantly faster than general-purpose classical heuristics, such as simulated annealing. While a tailored classical solver can outperform DQI on this instance, our results establish that combining quantum Fourier transforms with powerful decoding primitives provides a promising new path toward quantum speedups for hard optimization problems. View details Towards Accessible Model-Free Verification Alexander Krentsel Oliver Ye Anthony Tafoya Xuqian Ma Sylvia Ratnasamy Anees Shaikh 2025 Preview Preview abstract Despite coming up on two decades of network verification research, verification tooling continues to see limited real-world adoption and outages continue to occur. Relying on interviews with network engineers and our own experience as a large network operator, we ask why. These conversations reveal that the culprit is traditional verification's reliance on hand-crafted network models, which leads to issues with coverage, correctness, maintainability, and fidelity, ultimately hindering practical applicability and adoption. To address this, we call for the research community to embrace "model-free verification" through network emulation. Recent technology advancements – maturation of orchestration infrastructure and vendor-provided container images – make it possible to leverage emulation to obtain a high-fidelity converged dataplane from actual router control plane code, and then apply established dataplane verification techniques to this extracted state. We prototype such a system with open-source components, and present early results showing this approach can accurately verify configurations previously untestable, paving the way for more robust, practical network verification. View details Ghost Points Matter: Far-Range Vehicle Detection with a Single mmWave Radar in Tunnel Chengzhen Meng Chenming He Jianmin Ji Yanyong Zhang Haojie Ren Van Fan Dequan Wang Rui Xia MobiCom 2025: The 31th Annual International Conference On Mobile Computing And Networking, ACM Preview Preview abstract Vehicle detection in tunnels is crucial for traffic monitoring and accident response, yet remains underexplored. In this paper, we develop mmTunnel, a millimeter-wave radar system that achieves far-range vehicle detection in tunnels. The main challenge here is coping with ghost points caused by multi-path reflections, which lead to severe localization errors and false alarms. Instead of merely removing ghost points, we propose correcting them to true vehicle positions by recovering their signal reflection paths, thus reserving more data points and improving detection performance, even in occlusion scenarios. However, recovering complex 3D reflection paths from limited 2D radar points is highly challenging. To address this problem, we develop a multi-path ray tracing algorithm that leverages the ground plane constraint and identifies the most probable reflection path based on signal path loss and spatial distance. We also introduce a curve-to-plane segmentation method to simplify tunnel surface modeling such that we can significantly reduce the computational delay and achieve real-time processing. We have evaluated mmTunnel with comprehensive experiments. In two test tunnels, we conducted controlled experiments in various scenarios with cars and trucks. Our system achieves an average F1 score of 93.7% for vehicle detection while maintaining real-time processing. Even in the challenging occlusion scenarios, the F1 score remains above 91%. Moreover, we collected extensive data from a public tunnel with heavy traffic at times and show our method could achieve an F1 score of 91.5% in real-world traffic conditions. View details 31 32 33 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
