 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 331 - 345 of 676 publications chip template Remove PlanGEN: A Framework Utilizing Inference-Time Algorithms with LLM Agents for Planning and Reasoning Hamid Palangi Hootan Nakhost Mihir Parmar Tomas Pfister Chen-Yu Lee Yanfei Chen Hossein Mobahi Long Le Palash Goyal Swaroop Mishra Chitta Baral Xin Liu Zifeng Wang Jindong Gu 2025 Preview Preview abstract Scaling inference-time computation in Large Language Models (LLMs) dramatically improves their capabilities for solving complex problems. While test-time scaling has shown promise in many tasks such as code generation and mathematical reasoning, integration of inference-time algorithms into multi-agent frameworks for planning and reasoning remains under-explored. To this end, we explore popular inference-time algorithms—Best of N, Tree of Thought (ToT), and REward BAlanced SEarch (REBASE)—with proposed feedback-driven refinement. Our feedback-driven refinement employs specialized agents: a constraint agent to enforce task instance-specific constraints, and a verifier agent to evaluate plan quality. Furthermore, we hypothesize that test-time scaling can be proportional to instance-level complexity. Thus, we propose an additional selection agent to dynamically optimize algorithm choice. We evaluate our proposed approaches on four different benchmarks, i.e., NATURAL PLAN, GPQA, OlympiadBench, and DocFinQA. Experimental results show that our methods outperform strong baselines, achieving state-of-the-art results in NATURAL PLAN, OlympiadBench , and DocFinQA. Our key findings demonstrate that constraint-guided iterative refinement and algorithm selection improves both planning and downstream reasoning in LLMs View details RADAR: Benchmarking Language Models on Imperfect Tabular Data Hamid Palangi Ali Heydari Kate Lin Ken Gu Kumar Ayush Hong Yu Yun Liu Mehran Kazemi Zhihan Zhang Yuzhe Yang Shwetak Patel Ming-Zher Poh Max Xu Mark Malhotra Xin Liu Orson Xu Evelyn Zhang Tim Althoff 2025 Preview Preview abstract Language models (LMs) are increasingly being deployed to perform autonomous data analyses, yet their~\textit{\robustnessTerm}-- the ability to recognize, reason over, and appropriately handle data artifacts such as missing values, outliers, and logical inconsistencies—remains under-explored. These artifacts are common in real-world tabular data and, if mishandled, can significantly compromise the validity of analytical conclusions. To address this gap, we present RADAR, a benchmark for systematically evaluating data awareness on tabular data. RADAR introduces programmatic perturbations for each unique query table pair, enabling targeted evaluation of model behavior. RADAR~ comprises 2500 queries for data analysis across 55 datasets spanning 20 domains and 5 data awareness dimensions. In addition to evaluating artifact handling, RADAR systematically varies table size to study how reasoning performance scales with input length. In our evaluation, we identify fundamental gaps in their ability to perform reliable, data-aware analyses. Designed to be flexible and extensible, RADAR supports diverse perturbation types and controllable table sizes, offering a valuable resource for advancing tabular reasoning. View details Machine learning the effects of many quantum measurements Wanda Hou Samuel Garratt Norhan Eassa Eliott Rosenberg Pedram Roushan Yi-Zhuang You Ehud Altman arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Measurements are essential for the processing and protection of information in quantum computers. They can also induce long-range entanglement between unmeasured qubits. However, when post-measurement states depend on many non-deterministic measurement outcomes, there is a barrier to observing and using the entanglement induced by prior measurements. Here we demonstrate a new approach for detecting such measurement-induced entanglement. We create short-range entangled states of one- and two-dimensional arrays of qubits in a superconducting quantum processor, and aim to characterize the long-range entanglement induced between distant pairs of qubits when we measure all of the others. To do this we use unsupervised training of neural networks on observations to create computational models for post-measurement states and, by correlating these models with experimental data, we reveal measurement-induced entanglement. Our results additionally demonstrate a transition in the ability of a classical agent to accurately model the experimental data; this is closely related to a measurement-induced phase transition. We anticipate that our work can act as a basis for future experiments on quantum error correction and more general problems in quantum control. View details LLM-based Lossless Text Simplification and its Effect on User Comprehension and Mental Load Theo Guidroz Diego Ardila Jimmy Li Adam Mansour Paul Jhun Nina Gonzalez Xiang Ji Mike Sanchez Sujay Kakarmath Mathias Bellaiche Miguel Ángel Garrido Faruk Ahmed Divyansh Choudhary Jay Hartford Georgina Xu Henry Serrano Yifan Wang Jeff Shaffer Eric (Yifan) Cao Yossi Matias Avinatan Hassidim Dale Webster Yun Liu Sho Fujiwara Peggy Bui Quang Duong arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract Information on the web, such as scientific publications and Wikipedia, often surpasses users' reading level. To help address this, we used a self-refinement approach to develop a LLM capability for minimally lossy text simplification. To validate our approach, we conducted a randomized study involving 4563 participants and 31 texts spanning 6 broad subject areas: PubMed (biomedical scientific articles), biology, law, finance, literature/philosophy, and aerospace/computer science. Participants were randomized to viewing original or simplified texts in a subject area, and answered multiple-choice questions (MCQs) that tested their comprehension of the text. The participants were also asked to provide qualitative feedback such as task difficulty. Our results indicate that participants who read the simplified text answered more MCQs correctly than their counterparts who read the original text (3.9% absolute increase, p View details Integer Programming for Generalized Causal Bootstrap Designs Jennifer Brennan Sébastien Lahaie Adel Javanmard Nick Doudchenko Jean Pouget-Abadie Proceedings of the 42 nd International Conference on Machine Learning (2025) Preview Preview abstract In experimental causal inference, we distinguish between two sources of uncertainty: design uncertainty, due to the treatment assignment mechanism, and sampling uncertainty, when the sample is drawn from a super-population. This distinction matters in settings with small fixed samples and heterogeneous treatment effects, as in geographical experiments. The standard bootstrap procedure most often used by practitioners primarily estimates sampling uncertainty, and the causal bootstrap procedure, which accounts for design uncertainty, was developed for the completely randomized design and the difference-in-means estimator, whereas non-standard designs and estimators are often used in these low-power regimes. We address this gap by proposing an integer program which computes numerically the worst-case copula used as an input to the causal bootstrap method, in a wide range of settings. Specifically, we prove the asymptotic validity of our approach for unconfounded, conditionally unconfounded, and individualistic with bounded confoundedness assignments, as well as generalizing to any linear-in-treatment and quadratic-in-treatment estimators. We demonstrate the refined confidence intervals achieved through simulations of small geographical experiments. View details Correlated Error Bursts in a Gap-Engineered Superconducting Qubit Array John Mark Kreikebaum Alex Bilmes Matt McEwen Kevin Miao Lev Ioffe Leigh Martin Vlad Kurilovich Wojtek Mruczkiewicz Lara Faoro Gabrielle Roberts Alex Opremcak Kevin Satzinger Alec Eickbusch Andreas Bengtsson Igor Aleiner Yu Chen Matthew Neeley Julian Kelly Paul Klimov arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract One of the roadblocks towards the implementation of a fault-tolerant superconducting quantum processor is impacts of ionizing radiation with the qubit substrate. Such impacts temporarily elevate the density of quasiparticles (QPs) across the device, leading to correlated qubit error bursts. The most damaging errors – T1 errors – stem from QP tunneling across the qubit Josephson junctions (JJs). Recently, we demonstrated that this type of error can be strongly suppressed by engineering the profile of superconducting gap at the JJs in a way that prevents QP tunneling. In this work, we identify a new type of correlated error that persists in the presence of gap engineering. We observe that impacts shift the frequencies of the affected qubits, and thus lead to correlated phase errors. The frequency shifts are systematically negative, reach values up to 3 MHz, and last for ~1 ms. We provide evidence that the shifts originate from the QP-qubit interactions in the JJ region. Further, we experimentally demonstrate these correlated phase errors are detrimental to the performance of quantum error correction protocols. View details Tracing the Representation Geometry of Language Models from Pretraining to Post-training Guillaume Lajoie Arna Ghosh Kumar Krishna Agrawal Komal Kumar Teru Blake Richards Melody Zixuan Li Adam Santoro 2025 Preview Preview abstract Complex representational changes in Large Language Models (LLMs) are critical for their capabilities, but are often obscured by standard metrics used to evaluate models during training, like loss or gradient norms. Here, we examine the representational changes that occur during LLM pretraining by analyzing their high-dimensional representation geometry using spectral methods (αReQ, RankMe). In two different families of models (OLMo and Pythia), hidden beneath the near monotonically-decreasing loss and gradient norm, we uncover non-monotonic learning phases in the geometry of the representations. These phases are curves. Specifically, we find that the pretraining stage consistently exhibits three distinct phases: (1) a ‘warm-up’ phase where the dimensionality of the representations drops drastically, (2) an ’entropy-seeking’ phase that expands the effective dimensionality of the representations in all directions, and (3) a ’compression-seeking’ phase that reduces the dimensionality by selectively expanding only along the dominant representational axes. This evolving representation geometry governs the trade-off between fitting the training distribution and generalizing beyond it: The models get better at reproducing specific short-context sequences from the data during the entropy-seeking phase, and at generalizing to novel long-context dependencies during the compression-seeking phase. Continued pretraining can lead to additional entropy-seeking and compression-seeking phases. Crucially, we also find that these different phases have implications for downstream fine-tuning. Optimal adaptability for Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT) emerges significantly earlier than peak zero-shot performance on factual question answering tasks and aligns with the transition out of the first compression-seeking phase. Furthermore, we observe that SFT often induces an ’entropy-seeking’ dynamic whereas Reinforcement Learning from Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) induces a ’compression-seeking’ dynamic. We investigate the implications of these representational dynamics on downstream generalization of instruction-tuning, and exploration capabilities of RLVR-tuned models. Our results demonstrate that spectral methods for analyzing high-dimensional representations can provide new insights on the functionally relevant changes that occur in LLMs over pretraining. View details PolarQuant: Quantizing KV Caches with Polar Transformation Vahab Mirrokni Insu Han Amin Karbasi Praneeth Kacham Amir Zandieh 2025 Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs) require significant memory to store Key-Value (KV) embeddings in their KV cache, especially when handling long-range contexts. Quantization of these KV embeddings is a common technique to reduce memory consumption. This work introduces PolarQuant, a novel quantization method employing random preconditioning and polar transformation. Our method first preconditions the embedding vectors using a random projection matrix. Then, we transform these vectors into polar coordinates and quantize the resulting polar representation. Our key insight is that, after random preconditioning, the angles in the polar representation exhibit a tightly bounded and concentrated distribution with an analytically computable form. This eliminates the need for explicit normalization, a computationally expensive step required by traditional quantization methods. Normalization introduces significant memory overhead because quantization parameters (e.g., zero point and scale) must be stored in full precision for each data block. This can add 1 to 2 bits per quantized value, depending on the block size. PolarQuant bypasses this normalization step, enabling substantial memory savings. Empirical evaluation demonstrates that PolarQuant achieves lower memory overheads than existing normalization-based KV quantization techniques. Moreover, it improves performance across various generation tasks, particularly those involving long-context understanding. View details The vast world of quantum advantage Robert Huang Jarrod McClean John Preskill Soonwon Choi ArXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract The quest to identify quantum advantages, where quantum physics truly outperforms classical physics, lies at the heart of quantum technology. While quantum devices promise extraordinary capabilities, from exponential computational speedups to unprecedented measurement precision, distinguishing genuine advantages from mere illusions remains a formidable challenge. In this endeavor, quantum theorists are like prophets trying to foretell a future where quantum technologies reign supreme. Yet, the boundary between visionary insight and unfounded fantasy is perilously thin. In this perspective, we explore the properties defining an ideal quantum advantage and examine our mathematical tools for navigating the vast world of quantum advantages across computation, learning, sensing, communication, and beyond. We show that some quantum advantages are inherently unpredictable using classical resources alone, suggesting a landscape far richer than what we can currently foresee. While mathematical rigor remains our indispensable guide in this exploration, the ultimate power of quantum technologies may emerge from the quantum advantages we cannot yet conceive. View details Visualizing dynamics of charges and strings in (2 + 1)D lattice gauge theories Tyler Cochran Bernhard Jobst Eliott Rosenberg Yuri Lensky Gaurav Gyawali Norhan Eassa Melissa Will Aaron Szasz Dmitry Abanin Rajeev Acharya Laleh Beni Trond Andersen Markus Ansmann Frank Arute Kunal Arya Abe Asfaw Juan Atalaya Ryan Babbush Brian Ballard Joe Bardin Andreas Bengtsson Alex Bilmes Alexandre Bourassa Jenna Bovaird Michael Broughton David Browne Brett Buchea Bob Buckley Tim Burger Brian Burkett Nicholas Bushnell Anthony Cabrera Juan Campero Hung-Shen Chang Jimmy Chen Benjamin Chiaro Jahan Claes Agnetta Cleland Josh Cogan Roberto Collins Paul Conner William Courtney Alex Crook Ben Curtin Sayan Das Sean Demura Laura De Lorenzo Agustin Di Paolo Paul Donohoe ILYA Drozdov Andrew Dunsworth Alec Eickbusch Aviv Elbag Mahmoud Elzouka Catherine Erickson Vinicius Ferreira Leslie Flores Ebrahim Forati Austin Fowler Brooks Foxen Suhas Ganjam Robert Gasca Élie Genois William Giang Dar Gilboa Raja Gosula Alejo Grajales Dau Dietrich Graumann Alex Greene Jonathan Gross Steve Habegger Monica Hansen Matt Harrigan Sean Harrington Paula Heu Oscar Higgott Jeremy Hilton Robert Huang Ashley Huff Bill Huggins Evan Jeffrey Zhang Jiang Cody Jones Chaitali Joshi Pavol Juhas Dvir Kafri Hui Kang Amir Karamlou Kostyantyn Kechedzhi Trupti Khaire Tanuj Khattar Mostafa Khezri Seon Kim Paul Klimov Bryce Kobrin Alexander Korotkov Fedor Kostritsa John Mark Kreikebaum Vlad Kurilovich Dave Landhuis Tiano Lange-Dei Brandon Langley Kim Ming Lau Justin Ledford Kenny Lee Brian Lester Loick Le Guevel Wing Li Alexander Lill Will Livingston Aditya Locharla Daniel Lundahl Aaron Lunt Sid Madhuk Ashley Maloney Salvatore Mandra Leigh Martin Orion Martin Cameron Maxfield Jarrod McClean Matt McEwen Seneca Meeks Anthony Megrant Kevin Miao Reza Molavi Sebastian Molina Shirin Montazeri Ramis Movassagh Charles Neill Michael Newman Anthony Nguyen Murray Ich Nguyen Chia Ni Kris Ottosson Alex Pizzuto Rebecca Potter Orion Pritchard Chris Quintana Ganesh Ramachandran Matt Reagor David Rhodes Gabrielle Roberts Kannan Sankaragomathi Kevin Satzinger Henry Schurkus Mike Shearn Aaron Shorter Noah Shutty Vladimir Shvarts Vlad Sivak Spencer Small Clarke Smith Sofia Springer George Sterling Jordan Suchard Alex Sztein Doug Thor Mert Torunbalci Abeer Vaishnav Justin Vargas Sergey Vdovichev Guifre Vidal Catherine Vollgraff Heidweiller Steven Waltman Shannon Wang Brayden Ware Ted White Kristi Wong Bryan Woo Cheng Xing Jamie Yao Ping Yeh Bicheng Ying Juhwan Yoo Nour Yosri Grayson Young Adam Zalcman Yaxing Zhang Ningfeng Zhu Nicholas Zobrist Sergio Boixo Julian Kelly Erik Lucero Yu Chen Vadim Smelyanskiy Hartmut Neven Adam Gammon-Smith Frank Pollmann Michael Knap Pedram Roushan Nature, 642 (2025), 315–320 Preview Preview abstract Lattice gauge theories (LGTs) can be used to understand a wide range of phenomena, from elementary particle scattering in high-energy physics to effective descriptions of many-body interactions in materials. Studying dynamical properties of emergent phases can be challenging, as it requires solving many-body problems that are generally beyond perturbative limits. Here we investigate the dynamics of local excitations in a LGT using a two-dimensional lattice of superconducting qubits. We first construct a simple variational circuit that prepares low-energy states that have a large overlap with the ground state; then we create charge excitations with local gates and simulate their quantum dynamics by means of a discretized time evolution. As the electric field coupling constant is increased, our measurements show signatures of transitioning from deconfined to confined dynamics. For confined excitations, the electric field induces a tension in the string connecting them. Our method allows us to experimentally image string dynamics in a (2+1)D LGT, from which we uncover two distinct regimes inside the confining phase: for weak confinement, the string fluctuates strongly in the transverse direction, whereas for strong confinement, transverse fluctuations are effectively frozen. We also demonstrate a resonance condition at which dynamical string breaking is facilitated. Our LGT implementation on a quantum processor presents a new set of techniques for investigating emergent excitations and string dynamics. View details Why all roads don't lead to Rome: Representation geometry varies across the human visual cortical hierarchy Zahraa Chorghay Arna Ghosh Shahab Bakhtiari Blake Richards (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Biological and artificial intelligence systems navigate the fundamental efficiency-robustness tradeoff for optimal encoding, i.e., they must efficiently encode numerous attributes of the input space while also being robust to noise. This challenge is particularly evident in hierarchical processing systems like the human brain. With a view towards understanding how systems navigate the efficiency-robustness tradeoff, we turned to a population geometry framework for analyzing representations in the human visual cortex alongside artificial neural networks (ANNs). In the ventral visual stream, we found general-purpose, scale-free representations characterized by a power law-decaying eigenspectrum in most but not areas. Of note, certain higher-order visual areas did not have scale-free representations, indicating that scale-free geometry is not a universal property of the brain. In parallel, ANNs trained with a self-supervised learning objective also exhibited scale-free geometry, but not after fine-tuning on a specific task. Based on these empirical results and our analytical insights, we posit that a system’s representation geometry is not a universal property and instead depends upon the computational objective. View details Enhanced $H$-Consistency Bounds Anqi Mao Mehryar Mohri Yutao Zhong Proceedings of the 36th International Conference on Algorithmic Learning Theory (ALT 2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent research has introduced a key notion of $H$-consistency bounds for surrogate losses. These bounds offer finite-sample guarantees, quantifying the relationship between the zero-one estimation error (or other target loss) and the surrogate loss estimation error for a specific hypothesis set. However, previous bounds were derived under the condition that a lower bound of the surrogate loss conditional regret is given as a convex function of the target conditional regret, without non-constant factors depending on the predictor or input instance. Can we derive finer and more favorable $H$-consistency bounds? In this work, we relax this condition and present a general framework for establishing *enhanced $H$-consistency bounds* based on more general inequalities relating conditional regrets. Our theorems not only subsume existing results as special cases but also enable the derivation of more favorable bounds in various scenarios. These include standard multi-class classification, binary and multi-class classification under Tsybakov noise conditions, and bipartite ranking. View details MetaFaith: Faithful Natural Language Uncertainty Expression in LLMs Gabrielle Kaili-May Liu Gal Yona Avi Caciularu Idan Szpektor Tim G. J. Rudner Arman Cohan 2025 Preview Preview abstract A critical component in the trustworthiness of LLMs is reliable uncertainty communication, yet LLMs often use assertive language when conveying false claims, leading to over-reliance and eroded trust. We present the first systematic study of faithful confidence calibration of LLMs, benchmarking models' ability to use linguistic expressions of uncertainty that faithfully reflect their intrinsic uncertainty, across a comprehensive array of models, datasets, and prompting strategies. Our results demonstrate that LLMs largely fail at this task, and that existing interventions are insufficient: standard prompt approaches provide only marginal gains, and existing, factuality-based calibration techniques can even harm faithful calibration. To address this critical gap, we introduce MetaFaith, a novel prompt-based calibration approach inspired by human metacognition. We show that MetaFaith robustly improves faithful calibration across diverse models and task domains, enabling up to 61% improvement in faithfulness and achieving an 83% win rate over original generations as judged by humans. View details Small Models, Big Results: Achieving Superior Intent Extraction through Decomposition Danielle Cohen Yoni Halpern Noam Kahlon Joel Oren Omri Berkovitch Sapir Caduri Ido Dagan Tal Efros 2025 Preview Preview abstract Understanding user intents from UI interaction trajectories remains a challenging, yet crucial, frontier in intelligent agent development. While massive, datacenter-based, multi-modal large language models (MLLMs) possess greater capacity to handle the complexities of such sequences, smaller models which can run on-device to provide a privacy-preserving, low-cost, and low-latency user experience, struggle with accurate intent inference. We address these limitations by introducing a novel decomposed approach: first, we perform structured interaction summarization, capturing key information from each user action. Second, we perform intent extraction using a fine-tuned model operating on the aggregated summaries. This method improves intent understanding in resource-constrained models, even surpassing the base performance of large MLLMs. View details Differentially Private Synthetic Data Release for Topics API Outputs Travis Dick Alessandro Epasto Josh Karlin Adel Javanmard Andres Munoz Medina Vahab Mirrokni Sergei Vassilvitskii Peilin Zhong Proceedings of the 31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recently, significant attention has been devoted to the design and analysis of Privacy-Preserving Ads APIs. Despite the interest of academics and regulators in understanding the privacy properties of such APIs, the empirical study of these methods is severely hindered by the lack of publicly-available data. This is because, a reliable empirical analysis of the privacy properties on an API requires access to a dataset consisting of realistic API outputs for a large collection of users. However, privacy reasons prevent the general release of such browsing data to the public. In this work we address this problem by developing a novel methodology to construct synthetic API outputs that are simultaneously realistic enough to enable accurate study and provide strong privacy protections to the user. We focus on one of the Privacy-Preserving Ads API: the Topics API; part of Google Chrome's Privacy Sandbox which enables interest-based advertising without relying third-party cookies. We develop a methodology to generate a Differentially Private dataset realistic enough to close match the re-identification risk properties of the real Topics API data. The use of differential privacy prevents the leak of private user information from this release. Our methodology is based on first computing a large number of differentially-private statistics describing how output API traces evolve over time. Then, we design a parameterized distribution over sequences of API traces and optimize its parameters so that they closely matches the statistics obtained. Finally, we create the synthetic data by drawing from this distribution. Our work is complemented with an open source release of the anonymized dataset obtained by this methodology. We hope this will enable external researchers to analyze the API in-depth and replicate prior and future work on a realistic large-scale dataset. We believe that this work will contribute to fostering transparency on the privacy properties of Privacy-Preserving Ads APIs. View details 23 24 25 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
