 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 421 - 435 of 676 publications chip template Remove Data Selection for ERMs Alexander Shlimovich Steve Hanneke Amir Yehudayoff Shay Moran 2025 Preview Preview abstract Learning theory has traditionally followed a model-centric approach, focusing on designing optimal algorithms for a fixed natural learning task (e.g., linear classification or regression). In this paper, we adopt a complementary data-centric perspective, whereby we fix a natural learning rule and focus on optimizing the training data. Specifically, we study the following question: given a learning rule \(\mathcal{A}\) and a data selection budget \(n\), how well can \(\mathcal{A}\) perform when trained on at most \(n\) data points selected from a population of \(N\) points? We investigate when it is possible to select \(n \ll N\) points and achieve performance comparable to training on the entire population. We address this question across a variety of empirical risk minimizers. Our results include optimal data-selection bounds for mean estimation, linear classification, and linear regression. Additionally, we establish two general results: a taxonomy of error rates in binary classification and in stochastic convex optimization. Finally, we propose several open questions and directions for future research. View details The JPEG XL Image Codec: History, Features, Coding Tools, Design Rationale, and Future Jon Sneyers Jyrki Alakuijala Luca Versari Zoltan Szabadka Sami Boukortt Amnon Cohen-Tidhar Moritz Firsching Evgenii Kliuchnikov Tal Lev-Ami Eric Portis Thomas Richter WATANABE Osamu arxiv (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract This article provides an extensive overview of the JPEG XL codec, describing its features and coding tools, the design rationale behind it, as well as its performance, history and potential future. It can be used as a companion document to the standard (ISO/IEC 18181), or as a standalone article to better understand the codec, either at a high level or in considerable technical detail. View details Amplifying Trans and Nonbinary Voices: A Community-Centred Harm Taxonomy for LLMs Eddie Ungless Sunipa Dev Cindy Bennett Beka Gulotta Jasmijn Bastings Remi Denton Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (2025) Preview Preview abstract We explore large language model (LLM) responses that may negatively impact the transgender and nonbinary (TGNB) community and introduce the Transing Transformers Toolkit, T3, which provides resources for identifying such harmful response behaviors. The heart of T3 is a community-centred taxonomy of harms, developed in collaboration with the TGNB community, which we complement with, amongst other guidance, suggested heuristics for evaluation. To develop the taxonomy, we adopted a multi-method approach that included surveys and focus groups with community experts. The contribution highlights the importance of community-centred approaches in mitigating harm, and outlines pathways for LLM developers to improve how their models handle TGNB-related topics. View details Beyond Retrieval: Generating Narratives in Conversational Recommender Systems Krishna Sayana Raghavendra Vasudeva Yuri Vasilevski Kun Su Liam Hebert James Pine Hubert Pham Ambarish Jash Sukhdeep Sodhi (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large Language Models (LLMs) have shown remarkable progress in generating human-quality text and engaging in complex reasoning. This presents a unique opportunity to revolutionize conversational recommender systems by enabling them to generate rich, engaging and personalized narratives that go beyond recommendations. However, the lack of suitable datasets limits research in this area. This paper addresses this challenge by making two key contributions. First, we introduce REGEN Reviews Enhanced with GEnerative Narratives, a new dataset extending the Amazon Product Reviews with rich user narratives. Furthermore, we perform an extensive automated evaluation of the dataset using a rater LLM. Second, the paper introduces a fusion architecture (CF model with an LLM) which serves as a baseline for REGEN. To the best of our knowledge, this represents the first attempt to analyze the capabilities of LLMs in understanding recommender signals and generating rich narratives. We demonstrate that LLMs can effectively learn from simple fusion architectures utilizing interaction-based CF embeddings, and this can be further enhanced using the metadata and personalization data associated with items. Our experiments show that combining CF and content embeddings leads to improvements of 4-12% in key language metrics compared to using either type of embedding individually. We also provide an analysis to interpret their contributions to this new generative task. View details Low temperature magnetic thermometry with LSCI 372 AC Resistance Bridge Vladimir Shvarts Ashley Huff (2025) Preview Preview abstract Electronic paramagnets, such as salts and metallic alloys, were used in the past as a convenient way to measure ultra-low temperatures. Custom-built sensors demonstrated simple 1/T temperature dependence of magnetisation and excellent thermal equilibration times in milliKelvin temperature range. Modern temperature controllers are part of the 3He-4He dilution refrigerators automated systems, and can measure both resistance and reactance of commercially available temperature sensors. Here we demonstrate an example of such a system, based LCSI 372 AC resistance bridge. It enables in-situ calibrations of Cerium Magnesium Nitrate as well as PdFe paramagnetic susceptibility sensors against calibrated resistive sensors. Such calibrations are validated with noise thermometry and superconducting fixed point devices down to 8 mK. View details V𝜖rity: Verifiable Local Differential Privacy Mariana Raykova Amrita Roy Chowdhury Baiyu Li Adria Gascon James Bell-Clark 2025 Preview Preview abstract Local differential privacy (LDP) enables individuals to report sensitive data while preserving privacy. Unfortunately, LDP mechanisms are vulnerable to poisoning attacks, where adversaries controlling a fraction of the reporting users can significantly distort the aggregate output–much more so than in a non-private solution where the inputs are reported directly. In this paper, we present two novel solutions that prevent poisoning attacks under LDP while preserving its privacy guarantees. Our first solution, Vϵrity-Auth, addresses scenarios where the users report inputs with a ground truth available to a third party. The second solution, Vϵrity, tackles the more challenging case in which the users locally generate their input and there is no ground truth which can be used to bootstrap verifiable randomness generation. View details Near-optimal Regret Using Policy Optimization in Online MDPs with Aggregate Bandit Feedback Tal Lancewicki Yishay Mansour ICML (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study an online finite-horizon Markov Decision Processes with adversarially changing loss and aggregate bandit feedback (a.k.a full-bandit). Under this type of feedback, the agent observes only the total loss incurred over the entire trajectory, rather than the individual losses at each intermediate step within the trajectory. We introduce the first Policy Optimization algorithms for this setting. In the known-dynamics case, we achieve the first \textit{optimal} regret bound of $\tilde \Theta(H^2\sqrt{SAK})$, where $K$ is the number of episodes, $H$ is the horizon, $S$ is the number of states, and $A$ is the number of actions of the MDP. In the unknown dynamics case we establish regret bound of $\tilde O(H^3 S \sqrt{AK})$, significantly improving the best known result by a factor of $H^2 S^5 A^2$. View details REGEN: A Dataset and Benchmarks with Natural Language Critiques and Narratives Kun Su Krishna Sayana Hubert Pham James Pine Yuri Vasilevski Raghavendra Vasudeva Marialena Kyriakidi Liam Hebert Ambarish Jash Anushya Subbiah Sukhdeep Sodhi (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper introduces a novel dataset REGEN (Reviews Enhanced with GEnerative Narratives), designed to benchmark the conversational capabilities of recommender Large Language Models (LLMs), addressing the limitations of existing datasets that primarily focus on sequential item prediction. REGEN extends the Amazon Product Reviews dataset by inpainting two key natural language features: (1) user critiques, representing user "steering" queries that lead to the selection of a subsequent item, and (2) narratives, rich textual outputs associated with each recommended item taking into account prior context. The narratives include product endorsements, purchase explanations, and summaries of user preferences. Further, we establish an end-to-end modeling benchmark for the task of conversational recommendation, where models are trained to generate both recommendations and corresponding narratives conditioned on user history (items and critiques). For this joint task, we introduce a modeling framework LUMEN (LLM-based Unified Multi-task Model with Critiques, Recommendations, and Narratives) which uses an LLM as a backbone for critiquing, retrieval and generation. We also evaluate the dataset's quality using standard auto-rating techniques and benchmark it by training both traditional and LLM-based recommender models. Our results demonstrate that incorporating critiques enhances recommendation quality by enabling the recommender to learn language understanding and integrate it with recommendation signals. Furthermore, LLMs trained on our dataset effectively generate both recommendations and contextual narratives, achieving performance comparable to state-of-the-art recommenders and language models. View details Pragmatic Fairness: Evaluating ML Fairness Within the Constraints of Industry Jessie Smith Michael Madaio Robin Burke Casey Fiesler 2025 Preview Preview abstract Machine learning (ML) fairness evaluation in real-world, industry settings presents unique challenges due to business-driven constraints that influence decision-making processes. While prior research has proposed fairness frameworks and evaluation methodologies, these approaches often focus on idealized conditions and may lack consideration for the practical realities faced by industry practitioners. To understand these practical realities, we conducted a semi-structured interview study with 21 experts from academia and industry specializing in ML fairness. Through this study, we explore three constraints of ML fairness evaluation in industry— balancing competing interests, lacking power/access, and getting buy-in—and how these constraints lead to satisficing, seeking satisfactory rather than ideal outcomes. We define the path from these constraints to satisficing as pragmatic fairness. Using recommender systems as a case study, we explore how practitioners navigate these constraints and highlight actionable strategies to improve fairness evaluations within these business-minded boundaries. This paper provides practical insights to guide fairness evaluations in industry while also showcasing how the FAccT community can better align research goals with the operational realities of practitioners. View details Streaming Attention Approximation via Discrepancy Theory Michael Kapralov Insu Han Ekaterina Kochetkova Kshiteej Sheth Amir Zandieh 2025 Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs) have achieved impressive success, but their high memory requirements present challenges for long-context token generation. In this paper we study the streaming complexity of attention approximation, a key computational primitive underlying token generation. Our main contribution is BalanceKV, a streaming algorithm for ϵ-approximating attention computations based on geometric process for selecting a balanced collection of Key and Value tokens as per Banaszczyk's vector balancing theory. We complement our algorithm with space lower bounds for streaming attention computation. Besides strong theoretical guarantees, BalanceKV exhibits empirically validated performance improvements over existing methods, both for attention approximation and end-to-end performance on various long context benchmarks. View details Spherical dimension Bogdan Chornomaz Shay Moran Tom Waknine 2025 Preview Preview abstract We introduce and study the \emph{spherical dimension}, a natural topological relaxation of the VC dimension that unifies several results in learning theory where topology plays a key role in the proofs. The spherical dimension is defined by extending the set of realizable datasets (used to define the VC dimension) to the continuous space of realizable distributions. In this space, a shattered set of size d (in the VC sense) is completed into a continuous object, specifically a d-dimensional sphere of realizable distributions. The spherical dimension is then defined as the dimension of the largest sphere in this space. Thus, the spherical dimension is at least the VC dimension. The spherical dimension serves as a common foundation for leveraging the Borsuk-Ulam theorem and related topological tools. We demonstrate the utility of the spherical dimension in diverse applications, including disambiguations of partial concept classes, reductions from classification to stochastic convex optimization, stability and replicability, and sample compression schemes. Perhaps surprisingly, we show that the open question posed by Alon, Hanneke, Holzman, and Moran (FOCS 2021) of whether there exist non-trivial disambiguations for halfspaces with margin is equivalent to the basic open question of whether the VC and spherical dimensions are finite together. View details Lorax: A Multitask, Multilingual Benchmark Suite for 20 Indonesian Languages Trevor Cohn Alham Fikri Aji 2025 Preview Preview abstract As one of the world's most populous countries, with 700 languages spoken, Indonesia is behind in terms of NLP progress. We introduce Lorax, a benchmark that focuses on low-resource languages of Indonesia and covers 6 diverse tasks: reading comprehension, open-domain QA, language inference, causal reasoning, translation, and cultural QA. We cover 20 languages, with the addition of 2 politeness registers for 3 of the languages. As a benchmark is essential to the progress itself, this data should provide a useful contribution to the community. We benchmark a diverse set of multilingual and region-focused LLMs and found that this benchmark is challenging. We note a visible discrepancy between performance in Indonesia and other languages, especially the low-resource ones. There is no clear lead when using a region-specific model as opposed to the general multilingual model. Lastly, we show that a change in register affects model performance, especially with registers not commonly found in social media, such as high-level politeness 'Krama' Javanese. View details A Fine-grained Characterization of PAC Learnability Marco Bressan Nataly Brukhim Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi Emmanuel Esposito Yishay Mansour Shay Moran Maximilian Thiessen COLT (2025) Preview Preview abstract In the multiclass PAC setting, even when full learnability is unattainable, meaningful information can often be extracted to guide predictions. However, classical learning theory has mainly focused on the dichotomy ``learnable vs.\ non-learnable'', leaving notions of partial learnability largely unexplored. Indeed, even for a non-learnable class, a learner may still achieve partial success—for example, by making reliable predictions whenever the true label belongs to a fixed subset of the label space, even if it fails otherwise. Similarly, the rigid nature of PAC learnability makes it impossible to distinguish between classes where one can achieve favorable trade-offs between, say, false-positive and false-negative rates, and classes where such trade-offs are fundamentally unattainable. In a nutshell, standard PAC learnability precludes a fine-grained exploration of learnability. To overcome this limitation, we develop a fine-grained theory of PAC learnability. For any hypothesis class \(\mathcal{H}\), given a loss function (which quantifies the penalty for predicting \(\hat{y}\) instead of the true label \(y\)) and a target loss threshold \(z\), our theory determines whether it is possible to achieve a loss of at most \(z\). In contrast, classical PAC learning considers only the special case of the zero-one loss and \(z = 0\), corresponding to a near perfect classification guarantee. We give a complete characterization of all attainable guarantees, captured by a \emph{finite family} of combinatorial dimensions, which we term the \emph{\(J\)-cube dimensions} of \(\mathcal{H}\). These dimensions are defined for every subset \(J\) of at least two labels. This extends the fundamental theorem of realizable PAC learning based on the VC dimension. In fact, our results hold in a more general multi-objective setting where we fully characterize the Pareto frontier of guarantees attainable for the class $\H$. View details The vast world of quantum advantage Robert Huang Jarrod McClean John Preskill Soonwon Choi ArXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract The quest to identify quantum advantages, where quantum physics truly outperforms classical physics, lies at the heart of quantum technology. While quantum devices promise extraordinary capabilities, from exponential computational speedups to unprecedented measurement precision, distinguishing genuine advantages from mere illusions remains a formidable challenge. In this endeavor, quantum theorists are like prophets trying to foretell a future where quantum technologies reign supreme. Yet, the boundary between visionary insight and unfounded fantasy is perilously thin. In this perspective, we explore the properties defining an ideal quantum advantage and examine our mathematical tools for navigating the vast world of quantum advantages across computation, learning, sensing, communication, and beyond. We show that some quantum advantages are inherently unpredictable using classical resources alone, suggesting a landscape far richer than what we can currently foresee. While mathematical rigor remains our indispensable guide in this exploration, the ultimate power of quantum technologies may emerge from the quantum advantages we cannot yet conceive. View details Is API Access to LLMs Useful for Generating Private Synthetic Tabular Data? Marika Swanberg Albert Cheu Edo Roth Peter Kairouz Ryan McKenna 2025 Preview Preview abstract Differentially private (DP) synthetic data is a versatile tool for enabling the analysis of private data. With the rise of foundation models, a number of new synthetic data algorithms privately finetune the weights of foundation models to improve over existing approaches to generating private synthetic data. In this work, we propose two algorithms for using API access only to generate DP tabular synthetic data. We extend the Private Evolution algorithm \citep{lin2023differentially, xie2024differentially} to the tabular data domain, define a workload-based distance measure, and propose a family of algorithms that use one-shot API access to LLMs. View details 29 30 31 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
