 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 466 - 480 of 676 publications chip template Remove AndroidWorld: An Open World for Autonomous Agents Jonathan Waltz Marybeth Fair Daniel Toyama Will Bishop Sarah Clinckemaillie Timothy Lillicrap Chris Rawles Robert Berry Gabrielle Lau Divya Tyam Yifan Chang Alice Li Folawiyo Campbell-Ajala Wei Li Oriana Riva ICLR 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Autonomous computer control agents that execute human tasks by controlling user interfaces (UIs) are emerging. Such agents would be valuable for humans, and progress in the field will be driven by realistic and reproducible benchmarks. We present AndroidWorld, a fully-functioning Android environment that pro-vides reward signals across 20 apps on 114 programmatic tasks. Instead of a static test set, the tasks in AndroidWorld parameterized, allowing for unlimited variation in language and task parameters. Reward signals are derived from An-droid system state, making them highly durable and extensible across different applications. To demonstrate AndroidWorld's extensibility, we integrate the popular MiniWoB++ into it.To evaluate AndroidWorld, we introduce a new multimodal autonomous agent for Android, M3A. Our agent achieves a 27% success rate leaving ample room for future work. Furthermore, we adapt a popular desktop web agent for Android, which we find to be less effective on mobile, suggesting future research is needed to build universal, cross-domain agents. Finally, we conduct robustness testing by testing M3A against a suite of real-world variations on a representative subset of tasks. AndroidWorld and the experiments in this paper are available at https://https//github.com/google-research/android-world: View details Zero-Shot Mono-to-Binaural Speech Synthesis Alon Levkovitch Julian Salazar Soroosh Mariooryad RJ Skerry-Ryan Nadav Bar Bastiaan Kleijn Eliya Nachmani Interspeech (2025), pp. 4168-4172 Preview Preview abstract We present ZeroBAS, a neural method to synthesize binaural speech from monaural speech recordings and positional information without training on any binaural data. To our knowledge, this is the first published zero-shot neural approach to mono-to-binaural speech synthesis. Specifically, we show that a parameter-free geometric time warping and amplitude scaling based on source location suffices to get an initial binaural synthesis that can be refined by iteratively applying a pretrained denoising vocoder. Furthermore, we find this leads to generalization across room conditions, which we measure by introducing a new dataset, TUT Mono-to-Binaural, to evaluate state-of-the-art monaural-to-binaural synthesis methods on unseen conditions. Our zero-shot method is perceptually on-par with the performance of supervised methods on previous standard mono-to-binaural dataset, and even surpasses them on our out-of-distribution TUT Mono-to-Binaural dataset. View details DynScaling: Efficient Verifier-free Inference Scaling via Dynamic and Integrated Sampling Sercan Arik Fei Wang Jiefeng Chen Xingchen Wan Ruoxi Sun 2025 Preview Preview abstract Inference-time scaling has been successful in enhancing large language model (LLM) performance by increasing computation at test time, but it often relies on external verifiers or is not optimized for manageable computational budgets. To address these, we propose DynScaling, which addresses these limitations through two primary innovations: an integrated parallel-sequential sampling strategy and a bandit-based dynamic budget allocation framework. The integrated sampling strategy unifies parallel and sequential sampling by constructing synthetic sequential reasoning chains from initially independent parallel responses, promoting diverse and coherent reasoning trajectories. The dynamic budget allocation framework formulates the allocation of computational resources as a multi-armed bandit problem, adaptively distributing the inference budget across queries based on the uncertainty of previously sampled responses, thereby maximizing computational efficiency. By synergizing these components, DynScaling effectively improves LLM performance under practical resource constraints without the need for external verifiers. Experimental results demonstrate that DynScaling consistently surpasses existing verifier-free inference scaling baselines in both task performance and computational cost. View details A Novel CI Coding Strategy Based on a Cochlear Model and Deep Neural Network Maryam Hosseini Tim Brochier Zachary Smith Brett Swanson Andrew Vandali Alan Kan Fadwa Alnafjan Kat Fernandez Richard F. Lyon Conference on Implantable Auditory Prostheses 2025 Preview Preview abstract Objective: Many CI recipients face difficulties in understanding speech in noisy environments and express frustration with the quality of music. This may be partly due to the simple filter banks used in current CI technology, which do not fully replicate the natural processes of the cochlea. This project aims to improve CI perception by more accurately mimicking the responses of the auditory nerve. Method: Audio signals were applied to CARFAC (Cascade of Asymmetric Resonators with Fast-Acting Compression) [1] to produce a representation of the auditory nerve response, known as a normal hearing (NH) “neurogram”. The NH neurogram was down-sampled and applied to a deep neural network (DNN) to produce 22 electrode stimulation currents. These currents were applied to an electrical hearing (EH) model incorporating current spread, neural adaptation, and refractoriness, to produce a CI neurogram. The DNN was trained on sentences from the TIMIT database to minimise the difference between the NH and CI neurograms. Results: The CI neurograms produced by the CARFAC-DNN strategy were more similar to the NH neurograms than the CI neurograms produced by the Nucleus ACE strategy. Similarity was quantified by the structural similarity index and mean squared error. Conclusions: The CARFAC-DNN strategy may provide a more natural auditory nerve response than traditional CI sound coding strategies. A sound-booth study with CI recipients is planned. This work was funded by Google through the Australian Future Hearing Initiative. References: [1] Lyon, R. F. (2017). Human and machine hearing. Cambridge University Press. View details Matryoshka Model Learning for Improved Elastic Student Models Chetan Verma Aditya Srinivas Timmaraju Cho-Jui Hsieh Ngot Bui Yang Zhang Suyash Damle Wen Chen Xin Liu Prateek Jain Inderjit Dhillon 2025 Preview Preview abstract Production machine learning models in the industry are often devel-oped with a primary focus on maximizing model quality. However,these models must ultimately operate within the resource con-straints of their serving infrastructure, including limitations on com-pute, memory and bandwidth. The rapid evolution of serving hard-ware, particularly with advancements in accelerator technology,necessitates periodic retraining to leverage newer, more efficientinfrastructure. This cyclical retraining process is resource-intensive,demanding significant model development time and incurring sub-stantial training costs. This challenge is further amplified by thetrend towards increasingly complex models, which inherently re-quire greater computational resources for training and deployment.While prior work has explored techniques like supernet sub-modelextraction to address training efficiency, a critical gap remains: theefficient generation of a spectrum of high-quality models froman existing production model, a common requirement in diverseindustrial applications. To bridge this gap, we introduce a novel ap-proach leveraging a "Teaching Assistant" (TA) model, derived froma given production model (referred to as the Student model). Wedemonstrate that through co-training the Student and TA modelswith Matryoshka structure while using online distillation, we notonly enhance the Student model’s performance but also enable theflexible creation of a model family offering a compelling trade-offbetween model quality and model size. View details Unlocking the real power of Multi Agent System (MAS) to improve efficiency and effectiveness of your employees Keerthi Chidambaram (2025) Preview Preview abstract This post delves into the shift within enterprise AI, moving from traditional Large Language Models (LLMs) to advanced, goal-oriented AI Agents and sophisticated Multi-Agent Systems (MAS). While individual agents, such as the "Data Agent" in Looker Conversational Analytics, excel at querying specific, governed datasets, they often fall short when addressing complex business challenges that span diverse, isolated systems across departments like Sales, Marketing, and Operations. To overcome these "data silos," we introduce and detail the architecture of a Multi-Agent System. This system, built on the Gemini Enterprise platform and utilizing the Agent Development Kit (ADK), features a Master Agent that coordinates various specialized Sub-Agents (including Data, Jira, and Salesforce agents). This coordination enables the system to independently break down intricate queries, gather validated information from disparate sources, and generate a cohesive, data-driven insight. This innovative architectural approach significantly boosts employee efficiency and effectiveness by automating the laborious process of data integration, thereby empowering users with a unified and intelligent platform. These AI Agents are designed to reason, plan, utilize tools, and autonomously complete complex, multi-step business tasks, with or without human involvement. Organizations globally are prioritizing the integration of AI Agents to enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of their workforce. View details Private Set Union with Multiple Contributions Travis Dick Haim Kaplan Alex Kulesza Uri Stemmer Ziteng Sun Ananda Theertha Suresh NeurIPS 2025 Preview Preview abstract In the private set union problem each user owns a bag of at most $k$ items (from some large universe of items), and we are interested in computing the union of the items in the bags of all of the users. This is trivial without privacy, but a differentially private algorithm must be careful about reporting items contained in only a small number of bags. We consider differentially private algorithms that always report a subset of the union, and define the utility of an algorithm to be the expected size of the subset that it reports. Because the achievable utility varies significantly with the dataset, we introduce the \emph{utility ratio}, which normalizes utility by a dataset-specific upper bound and characterizes a mechanism by its lowest normalized utility across all datasets. We then develop algorithms with guaranteed utility ratios and complement them with bounds on the best possible utility ratio. Prior work has shown that a single algorithm can be simultaneously optimal for all datasets when $k=1$, but we show that instance-optimal algorithms do not exist when $k>1$, and characterize how performance degrades as $k$ grows. At the same time, we design a private algorithm that achieves the maximum possible utility, regardless of $k$, when the item histogram matches a prior prediction (for instance, from a previous data release) and degrades gracefully with the $\ell_\infty$ distance between the prediction and the actual histogram when the prediction is imperfect. View details Tight Bounds for Answering Adaptively Chosen Concentrated Queries Emma Rapoport Edith Cohen Uri Stemmer NeurIPS 2025 Preview Preview abstract Most work on adaptive data analysis assumes that samples in the dataset are independent. When correlations are allowed, even the non-adaptive setting can become intractable, unless some structural constraints are imposed. To address this, Bassily and Freund [2016] introduced the elegant framework of {\em concentrated queries}, which requires the analyst to restrict itself to queries that are concentrated around their expected value. While this assumption makes the problem trivial in the non-adaptive setting, in the adaptive setting it remains quite challenging. In fact, all known algorithms in this framework support significantly fewer queries than in the independent case: At most $O(n)$ queries for a sample of size $n$, compared to $O(n^2)$ in the independent setting. In this work, we prove that this utility gap is inherent under the current formulation of the concentrated queries framework, assuming some natural conditions on the algorithm. Additionally, we present a simplified version of the best-known algorithms that match our impossibility result. View details “Made by People, Described by People”: The Changing Work Practices of Audio Description Professionals Cindy Bennett Amy Pavel Aidan Bryant Laura Eberly Renee Shelby Shaun Kane 2025 Preview Preview abstract Audio description (AD) narrates important visual details which are played during dialogue gaps in video soundtracks, making them accessible to blind and low vision (BLV) audiences. AD professionals (producers, writers, narrators, mixers, and quality control specialists) possess expert knowledge of AD development and the constraints that affect their work. However, their perspectives remain largely absent in AD research. We present interviews with 17 AD professionals (8 BLV), detailing their workflows to produce AD for recorded media and live theater. We additionally explore their perspectives on recent changes impacting their work, revealing tensions between advocacy for culturally competent AD and the rise of automations—some beneficial, others with concerning implications for AD quality. Highlighting these tensions, we offer research directions to support AD professionals, and we pose guiding questions for AD and AI innovators on preserving the high-quality human touch professionals consider fundamental to the accessibility provision. View details How Does Code Pretraining Affect Language Model Task Performance Jackson Petty Sjoerd van Steenkiste Tal Linzen Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large language models are typically pretrained on a corpus of natural language text. In recent years, the desire to create language models which can interpret and generate code in different programming languages has led to the inclusion of non-linguistic code in the pretraining corpora for language models. Aside from aiding programming-related tasks, anecdotal evidence suggests that including code in pretraining corpora may improve performance on other, unrelated tasks: To study this, we pretrain suites of language models on parameterized `code mixture' datasets which interleave natural language and code in two different settings: competitive, in which the total volume of data seen during pretraining is held constant; and additive, in which the volume of language data is held constant. We study how the pretraining mixture affects (a) general reasoning on BigBench tasks, and (b) compositionality, measured by generalization accuracy on finetuned compositional benchmarks. We find that increased code mixtures cause higher performance on compositional and reasoning tasks involving structured formal outputs (like semantic parsing and arithmetic) and, conversely that code harms performance on purely-linguistic or world knowledge tasks. View details Stochastic Deep Restoration Priors for Imaging Inverse Problems Yuyang Hu Albert Peng Weijie Gan Peyman Milanfar Mauricio Delbracio Ulugbek S. Kamilov Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning (2025) Preview Preview abstract Deep neural networks trained as image denoisers are widely used as priors for solving imaging inverse problems. We introduce Stochastic deep Restoration Priors (ShaRP), a novel framework that stochastically leverages an ensemble of deep restoration models beyond denoisers to regularize inverse problems. By using generalized restoration models trained on a broad range of degradations beyond simple Gaussian noise, ShaRP effectively addresses structured artifacts and enables self-supervised training without fully sampled data. We prove that ShaRP minimizes an objective function involving a regularizer derived from the score functions of minimum mean square error (MMSE) restoration operators. We also provide theoretical guarantees for learning restoration operators from incomplete measurements. ShaRP achieves state-of-the-art performance on tasks such as magnetic resonance imaging reconstruction and single-image super-resolution, surpassing both denoiser- and diffusion-model-based methods without requiring retraining. View details Instability of steady-state mixed-state symmetry-protected topological order to strong-to-weak spontaneous symmetry breaking Jeet Shah Christopher Fechisin Yuxin Wang Joseph T. Iosue James D. Watson Yan-Qi Wang Brayden Ware Cheng-Ju Lin Alexey Gorshkov Quantum (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent experimental progress in controlling open quantum systems enables the pursuit of mixed- state nonequilibrium quantum phases. We investigate whether open quantum systems hosting mixed-state symmetry-protected topological states as steady states retain this property under sym- metric perturbations. Focusing on the decohered cluster state—a mixed-state symmetry-protected topological state protected by a combined strong and weak symmetry—we construct a parent Lind- bladian that hosts it as a steady state. This Lindbladian can be mapped onto exactly solvable reaction-diffusion dynamics, even in the presence of certain perturbations, allowing us to solve the parent Lindbladian in detail and reveal previously-unknown steady states. Using both analytical and numerical methods, we find that typical symmetric perturbations cause strong-to-weak sponta- neous symmetry breaking at arbitrarily small perturbations, destabilize the steady-state mixed-state symmetry-protected topological order. However, when perturbations introduce only weak symmetry defects, the steady-state mixed-state symmetry-protected topological order remains stable. Addi- tionally, we construct a quantum channel which replicates the essential physics of the Lindbladian and can be efficiently simulated using only Clifford gates, Pauli measurements, and feedback. View details A Unified Analysis of Nonstochastic Delayed Feedback for Combinatorial Semi-Bandits, Linear Bandits, and MDPs Lukas Zierahn Tal Lancewicki Dirk van der Hoeven Aviv Rosenberg Nicolo Cesa-Bianchi Journal of Machine Learning Research (JMLR), 26 (2025), pp. 1-60 Preview Preview abstract We derive a new analysis of Follow The Regularized Leader (FTRL) for online learning with delayed bandit feedback. By separating the cost of delayed feedback from that of bandit feedback, our analysis allows us to obtain new results in three important settings. On the one hand, we derive the first optimal (up to logarithmic factors) regret bounds for combinatorial semi-bandits with delay and adversarial Markov decision processes with delay (both known and unknown transition functions). On the other hand, we use our analysis to derive an efficient algorithm for linear bandits with delay achieving near-optimal regret bounds. We also show that FTRL remains stable across multiple rounds under mild assumptions on the the regularizer. View details HOI-Diff: Text-Driven Synthesis of 3D Human-Object Interactions using Diffusion Models Huaizu Jiang Varun Jampani Deqing Sun Yiming Xie Zizhao Wu Xiaogang Peng CVPR 2025 Workshop of HuMoGen Preview Preview abstract We address the problem of generating motions for 3D human-object interactions. Unlike previous methods, which mainly focus on static objects and limited interaction types, our work jointly synthesizes the motion of humans and objects for various interactions with text conditioning. Our key idea is to leverage a motion diffusion model for both human and object motion synthesis, which produces coherent motion of interactions. To precisely generate the physically plausible contact between human and object, the interaction correction module, which is a diffusion-based affordance prediction model paired with spatial guidance, is proposed to improve the interactions at each diffusion step. Experiments on the BEHAVE dataset demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, producing realistic motions of various interactions between human and objects with text prompts. View details Denoising: a powerful building block for imaging, inverse problems and machine learning Peyman Milanfar Mauricio Delbracio Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A (2025) Preview Preview abstract Denoising, the process of reducing random fluctuations in a signal to emphasize essential patterns, has been a fundamental problem of interest since the dawn of modern scientific inquiry. Recent denoising techniques, particularly in imaging, have achieved remarkable success, nearing theoretical limits by some measures. Yet, despite tens of thousands of research papers, the wide-ranging applications of denoising beyond noise removal have not been fully recognized. This is partly due to the vast and diverse literature, making a clear overview challenging. This article aims to address this gap. We present a clarifying perspective on denoisers, their structure and their desired properties. We emphasize the increasing importance of denoising and showcase its evolution into an essential building block for complex tasks in imaging, inverse problems and machine learning. Despite its long history, the community continues to uncover unexpected and groundbreaking uses for denoising, further solidifying its place as a cornerstone of scientific and engineering practice. View details 32 33 34 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
