 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 496 - 510 of 676 publications chip template Remove Linear Elastic Caching via Ski Rental Ravi Kumar Todd Lipcon Manish Purohit Tamas Sarlos Conference on Innovative Data Systems Research (2025) Preview Preview abstract In this work we study the Linear Elastic Caching problem, where the goal is to minimize the total cost of a cache inclusive of not just its misses, but also its memory footprint integrated over time. We demonstrate a theoretical connection to the classic ski rental problem and propose a practical algorithm that combines online caching algorithms with ski rental policies. We also introduce a lightweight machine learning-based algorithm for ski rental that is optimized for production workloads and is easy to integrate within existing database systems. Evaluations on both production workloads in Google Spanner and publicly available traces show that the proposed elastic caching approach can significantly reduce the total cache cost compared to traditional fixed-size cache policies. View details Individual Regret in Cooperative Stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits Idan Barnea tal lancewicki Yishay Mansour NeurIPS (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study the regret in stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB) with multiple agents that communicate over an arbitrary connected communication graph. We analyzed a variant of Cooperative Successive Elimination algorithm, $\coopse$, and show an individual regret bound of ${O}(\mathcal{R} / m + A^2 + A \sqrt{\log T})$ and a nearly matching lower bound. Here $A$ is the number of actions, $T$ the time horizon, $m$ the number of agents, and $\mathcal{R} = \sum_{\Delta_i > 0}\log(T)/\Delta_i$ is the optimal single agent regret, where $\Delta_i$ is the sub-optimality gap of action $i$. Our work is the first to show an individual regret bound in cooperative stochastic MAB that is independent of the graph's diameter. When considering communication networks there are additional considerations beyond regret, such as message size and number of communication rounds. First, we show that our regret bound holds even if we restrict the messages to be of logarithmic size. Second, for logarithmic number of communication rounds, we obtain a regret bound of ${O}(\mathcal{R} / m+A \log T)$. View details On the Randomized Locality of Matching Problems in Regular Graphs Seri Khoury Joshua Wang Aaron Schild Manish Purohit 2025 Preview Preview abstract The main goal in distributed symmetry-breaking is to understand the locality of problems; i.e., the radius of the neighborhood that a node needs to explore in order to arrive at its part of a global solution. In this work, we study the locality of matching problems in the family of regular graphs, which is one of the main benchmarks for establishing lower bounds on the locality of symmetry-breaking problems, as well as for obtaining classification results. Our main results are summarized as follows: 1. Approximate matching: We develop randomized algorithms to show that (1 + ϵ)- approximate matching in regular graphs is truly local; i.e., the locality depends only on ϵ and is independent of all other graph parameters. Furthermore, as long as the degree ∆ is not very small (namely, as long as ∆ ≥ poly(1/ϵ)), this dependence is only logarithmic in 1/ϵ. This stands in sharp contrast to maximal matching in regular graphs which requires some dependence on the number of nodes n or the degree ∆. We show matching lower bounds for both results. 2. Maximal matching: Our techniques further allow us to establish a strong separation between the node-averaged complexity and worst-case complexity of maximal matching in regular graphs, by showing that the former is only O(1). Central to our main technical contribution is a novel martingale-based analysis for the ≈ 40- year-old algorithm by Luby. In particular, our analysis shows that applying one round of Luby’s algorithm on the line graph of a ∆-regular graph results in an almost ∆/2-regular graph. View details The Diffusion Process as a Correlation Machine: Linear Denoising Insights Dana Weitzner Mauricio Delbracio Peyman Milanfar Raja Giryes Transactions on Machine Learning Research (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recently, diffusion models have gained popularity due to their impressive generative abilities. These models learn the implicit distribution given by a training dataset, and sample new data by transforming random noise through the reverse process, which can be thought of as gradual denoising. In this work, to shed more light on the evolution of denoisers in the reverse process, we examine the generation process as a ``correlation machine'', where random noise is repeatedly enhanced in correlation with the implicit given distribution. To this end, we explore the linear case, where the optimal denoiser in the MSE sense is known to be the PCA projection. This enables us to connect the theory of diffusion models to the spiked covariance model, where the dependence of the denoiser on the noise level and the amount of training data can be expressed analytically, in the rank-1 case. In a series of numerical experiments, we extend this result to general low rank data, and show that low frequencies emerge earlier in the generation process, where the denoising basis vectors are more aligned to the true data with a rate depending on their eigenvalues. This model allows us to show that the linear reverse process is a generalization of the prevalent power iteration method, where the generated distribution is composed of several estimations of the given covariance, in varying stages of convergence. Finally, we empirically demonstrate the applicability of our findings beyond the linear case, in the Jacobians of a deep, non-linear denoiser, used in general image generation tasks. View details Differentially Private Space-Efficient Algorithms for Counting Distinct Elements in the Turnstile Model Rachel Cummings Alessandro Epasto Jieming Mao Tamalika Mukherjee Tingting Ou Peilin Zhong ICML 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract The {continual observation} streaming setting captures data analysis scenarios where both data collection is ongoing, and real-time analysis of the collected data is needed at all time points. The \emph{turnstile} streaming model is a subclass of the continual observation model and allows for both the insertion and deletion of data items over time. Typically, the length of the stream $T$ and the size of the universe $\cU$ from which data items come from are considered to be extremely large, thus practical solutions should use space at most sublinear in $T$ and $\mathcal{U}$. Because many of the relevant applications for data analysis in the continual observation setting involve the analysis of sensitive user data, this motivates the need to develop space-efficient algorithms that achieve formal privacy protections such as differential privacy. We give the first sublinear space differentially private algorithms for the fundamental problem of counting distinct elements in the turnstile streaming model that achieves $\Tilde{O}(T^{1/3})$ space and additive error and a $(1+\eta)$-relative approximation for all $\eta \in (0,1)$. Our algorithm significantly improves upon the space requirements of the state of the art for this problem in the turnstile model~\cite{JainKRSS23} which has a linear dependency in both $T$ and $\vert \cU \vert$, while still achieving an additive error that is close to the known $T^{1/4}$ lower bound. View details Post-hoc Unsupervised Concept-based Explanation for Language: A Comparison Through User-LLM Antonin Poché Alon Jacovi Agustin Martin Picard Victor Boutin Fanny Jourdan 2025 Preview Preview abstract Concept-based explanations enhance interpretability by mapping complex model computations to human-understandable concepts. Evaluating their interpretability is complex, hinging not only on the quality of the concept space but also on how effectively these concepts are communicated to users. Existing evaluation metrics often focus solely on the concept space, neglecting the impact of communication and evaluating either faithfulness or plausibility. To address these challenges, we introduce a simulatability framework that assesses interpretability by measuring a user's ability to predict the model's outputs based solely on the provided explanations. This approach accounts for both the concept space and its communication, encompassing the full spectrum of interpretability. Recognizing the impracticality of extensive human studies, we propose using large language models (user-LLMs) as proxies for human users in simulatability experiments. This novel method allows for scalable and consistent evaluation across various models and datasets. Our comprehensive experiments demonstrate that user-LLMs effectively simulate human interpretability assessments, providing consistent rankings of explanation methods. Our work advances the scalable evaluation of interpretability in Explainable AI, promoting the development of AI systems that are both accurate and transparent. View details Artificial Intelligence, in context: The Collaboration for trANslational Artificial Intelligence tRIals (CANAIRI) and the value of local evaluation of AI Melissa D McCradden Alex John London Judy Gichoya Mark Sendak Lauren Erdman Ian Stedman Lauren Oakden-Rayner Ismail Akrout James A Anderson Lesley-Anne Farmer Robert Greer Anna Goldenberg Yvonne Ho Shalmali Joshi Jennie Louise Muhammad Mamdani Mjaye L. Mazwi Abdullahi Mohamud Lyle Palmer Antonios Peperidis Stephen Pfohl Mandy Rickard Carolyn Semmler Karandeep Singh Devin Singh Seyi Soremekun Lana Tikhomirov Anton H van der Vegt Xiaoxuan Liu Nature Medicine (2025) Preview Preview abstract The literature and governance frameworks relating to the clinical translation of artificial intelligence (AI) products are coalescing around best practices. A major knowledge gap concerns demonstration of local, on-the-ground evidence of on-the-ground performance, equity, and safety. The ‘silent trial’ (also known as ‘silent evaluation’, ‘shadow trial’, ‘shadow evaluation’) refers to the integration of an AI system into the intended operational systems without affecting patient care. A silent trial enables collection of on-the-ground evidence of performance while integrating data security considerations, assessing operational feasibility, validating deployment strategy, selecting risk category thresholds, and testing workflow integration. While increasingly recognized for their value, silent trials remain under-appreciated and under-utilized both in the breadth of their uptake and in the scope of considerations they can address - for example, local fairness assessments and patient engagement, among others. This commentary introduces the Collaboration for trANslational Artificial Intelligence tRIals (CANAIRI), an international consortium initiative that aims to develop guidance around the application of holistic silent evaluations for healthcare AI tools. View details Delay as Payoff in MAB Ofir Schlisselberg Ido Cohen tal lancewicki Yishay Mansour AAAI (2025) Preview Preview abstract In this paper, we investigate a variant of the classical stochastic Multi-armed Bandit (MAB) problem, where the payoff received by an agent (either cost or reward) is both delayed, and directly corresponds to the magnitude of the delay. This setting models faithfully many real world scenarios such as the time it takes for a data packet to traverse a network given a choice of route (where delay serves as the agent’s cost); or a user's time spent on a web page given a choice of content (where delay serves as the agent’s reward). Our main contributions are tight upper and lower bounds for both the cost and reward settings. For the case that delays serve as costs, we prove optimal regret that scales as $\sum_{i:\Delta_i > 0}\frac{\log T}{\Delta_i} + d^*$ where $T$ is the number of rounds, $\Delta_i$ are the sub-optimality gaps and $d^*$ is the minimal expected delay amongst arms. For the case that delays serves as rewards, we show optimal regret of $\sum_{i:\Delta_i > 0}\frac{\log T}{\Delta_i} + \bar{d}$ where $\bar d$ is the second maximal expected delay. These improve over the regret in the general delay-dependent payoff setting, which scales as $\sum_{i:\Delta_i > 0}\frac{\log T}{\Delta_i} + D$, where $D$ is the maximum possible delay. Our regret bounds highlight the difference between the cost and reward scenarios, showing that the improvement in the cost scenario is more significant than for the reward. Finally, we accompany our theoretical results with an empirical evaluation. View details Not Every AI Problem is a Data Problem: What Can Data Shape Predict About Fit for Data-Driven Scaling? Tanya Rodchenko Natasha Noy Nino Scherrer Communication of ACM, 68 (2025), pp. 28-31 Preview Preview abstract This article is targeting an external publication like CACM and is meant to be an opinion piece. Abstract: Large Language Models (LLMs) have revolutionized the AI landscape, demonstrating remarkable capabilities across a wide range of tasks. Each new model seemingly reinforces the notion that modern transformer-based AI can conquer any challenge if armed with sufficient compute and data. However, the scaling-driven paradigm is far from a universal solution to AI’s diverse challenges. For example, while scaling has accelerated certain applications, such as robotics, it has yet to show significant impact in others, such as identifying misinformation. Currently, there is no clear framework for distinguishing which use cases thrive from scaling with more data and which demand alternative approaches. We are beginning to observe that the shape of data itself may hold valuable clues that could inform the success of data-driven scaling. For instance, insights from topological data analysis suggest that examining structural patterns and stability of data across multiple scales can help determine when scaling will be advantageous. Moreover, the practicalities of data acquisition impose additional constraints that we must factor into the scaling equation upfront. Factors such as availability of high quality data, with its highly nuanced definition, complexity and resource intensity of data collection, and availability of proper evaluation benchmarks determine not just the effectiveness but also viability of scaling. We have translated these emerging insights about data shape and nature of data acquisition into a practical framework of questions that evaluate predictiveness of historical data, stability of data patterns, clarity of data requirements, feasibility of high-quality data collection, and ease of assessing data quality. Together, these answers can help practitioners make more informed decisions about when scaling is more likely to yield successful outcomes. We have applied the framework to several AI use cases as an example. These early observations highlight a critical need for continued research in this domain. Full draft link: https://docs.google.com/document/d/1f-HQ69KA4Ec7lNeWI-lTHUurhC0WMO4lNUiDUAEPKes/edit?usp=sharing View details Efficient transformation invariant preconditioning for LoRA optimization Jui-Nan Yen Si Si Zhao Meng Felix Yu Inderjit Dhillon Cho-Jui Hsieh Sanjiv Kumar ICLR (2025) Preview Preview abstract Adaptive methods with non-diagonal preconditioning have demonstrated state-of-the-art performances on various tasks. However, the high memory cost of the existing non-diagonal preconditioning methods makes them unsuitable for the training of Low Rank Adaptions (LoRA). Additionally, these methods do not meet the criteria of efficient feature learning, which is important for LoRA optimization. In this work, we propose a non-diagonal preconditioning method to improve LoRA optimization. It has a low memory cost and achieves efficient feature learning through transformation invariance among equivalent LoRA weights. We provide theoretical justifications for our method. Our experiments on LLM LoRA finetuning demonstrate the effectiveness of our method. View details Balanced coupling in electromagnetic circuits Daniel Sank Mostafa Khezri Juan Atalaya Sergei Isakov Physical Review Applied, 23 (2025), pp. 024012 Preview Preview abstract The rotating-wave approximation (RWA) is ubiquitous in the analysis of driven and coupled resonators. However, the limitations of the RWA seem to be poorly understood and in some cases the RWA disposes of essential physics. We investigate the RWA in the context of electrical circuits. Using a classical Hamiltonian approach, we find that by balancing electrical and magnetic components of the resonator drive or resonator-resonator coupling, the RWA can be made exact. This type of balance, in which the RWA is exact, has applications in superconducting qubits, where it suppresses nutation normally associated with strong Rabi driving. In the context of dispersive readout, balancing the qubit-resonator coupling changes the qubit leakage induced by the resonator drive but does not remove it in the case of the transmon qubit. View details CoNFiLD-inlet: Synthetic Turbulence Inflow Using Generative Latent Diffusion Models with Neural Fields Jianxun Wang Qing Wang Pan Du Meet Hemant Parikh Xiantao Fan Xinyang Liu Yi-fan Chen Physics Review Fluids (2025) Preview Preview abstract Eddy-resolving turbulence simulations require stochastic inflow conditions that accurately replicate the complex, multi-scale structures of turbulence. Traditional recycling-based methods rely on computationally expensive precursor simulations, while existing synthetic inflow generators often fail to reproduce realistic coherent structures of turbulence. Recent advances in deep learning (DL) have opened new possibilities for inflow turbulence generation, yet many DL-based methods rely on deterministic, autoregressive frameworks prone to error accumulation, resulting in poor robustness for long-term predictions. In this work, we present CoNFiLD-inlet, a novel DL-based inflow turbulence generator that integrates diffusion models with a conditional neural field (CNF)-encoded latent space to produce realistic, stochastic inflow turbulence. By parameterizing inflow conditions using Reynolds numbers, CoNFiLD-inlet generalizes effectively across a wide range of Reynolds numbers (Reτ between 103 and 104) without requiring retraining or parameter tuning. Comprehensive validation through a priori and a posteriori tests in Direct Numerical Simulation (DNS) and Wall-Modeled Large Eddy Simulation (WMLES) demonstrates its high fidelity, robustness, and scalability, positioning it as an efficient and versatile solution for inflow turbulence synthesis. View details Scalable Private Set Union beyond Uniform Weighting Justin Y. Chen Vincent Cohen-Addad Alessandro Epasto Morteza Zadimoghaddam 2025 Preview Preview abstract In the differentially private set union problem, users contribute sets of items as input, and the output is a subset of the union of all items. Algorithms for this problem seek to output as many items as possible while maintaining differential privacy with respect to the addition or removal of an individual user. The basic solution to this problem maintains a weight over each item. Each user contributes uniformly to the items in their set, random noise is added to the weights, and items with noisy weight above a certain threshold are output. The only scalable (i.e., distributed) algorithms for this problem from prior work are this basic algorithm and an iterative method which repeatedly calls the basic algorithm, ignoring items found in prior invocations. In this work, we give an improved weighting algorithm over basic uniform weighting. Our algorithm reroutes weight from items with weight far above the threshold to items with smaller weight, thereby increasing the probability that less frequent items are output. The algorithm is scalable and does not suffer any privacy loss when compared to the basic algorithm. We prove that our algorithm will never underperform the basic algorithm and show experimentally that replacing the basic algorithm with ours yields the best results among scalable algorithms for the private set union problem. View details Reducing Symbiosis Bias through Better A/B Tests of Recommendation Algorithms Jennifer Brennan Yahu Cong Yiwei Yu Lina Lin Yajun Peng Changping Meng Ningren (Peter) Han Jean Pouget-Abadie David Holtz Proceedings of WWW'25 (2025) Preview Preview abstract It is increasingly common in digital environments to use A/B tests to compare the performance of recommendation algorithms. However, such experiments often violate the stable unit treatment value assumption (SUTVA), particularly SUTVA's ''no hidden treatments'' assumption, due to the shared data between algorithms being compared. This results in a novel form of bias, which we term ''symbiosis bias,'' where the performance of each algorithm is influenced by the training data generated by its competitor. In this paper, we investigate three experimental designs--cluster-randomized, data-diverted, and user-corpus co-diverted experiments--aimed at mitigating symbiosis bias. We present a theoretical model of symbiosis bias and simulate the impact of each design in dynamic recommendation environments. Our results show that while each design reduces symbiosis bias to some extent, they also introduce new challenges, such as reduced training data in data-diverted experiments. We further validate the existence of symbiosis bias using data from a large-scale A/B test conducted on a global recommender system, demonstrating that symbiosis bias affects treatment effect estimates in the field. Our findings provide actionable insights for researchers and practitioners seeking to design experiments that accurately capture algorithmic performance without bias in treatment effect estimates introduced by shared data. View details Learning in Budgeted Auctions with Spacing Objectives Giannis Fikioris Robert Kleinberg Yoav Kolumbus raunak kumar Yishay Mansour Eva Tardos EC (2025) Preview Preview abstract In many repeated auction settings, participants care not only about how frequently they win but also about how their winnings are distributed over time. This problem arises in various practical domains where avoiding congested demand is crucial and spacing is important, such as advertising campaigns. We initiate the study of repeated auctions with preferences for spacing of wins over time. We introduce a simple model of this phenomenon, where the value of a win is given by any concave function of the time since the last win. We study the optimal policies for this setting in repeated second-price auctions and offer learning algorithms for the bidders that achieve $\tilde O(\sqrt{T})$ regret. We achieve this by showing that an infinite-horizon Markov decision process (MDP) with the budget constraint in expectation is essentially equivalent to our problem, \emph{even when limiting that MDP to a very small number of states}. The algorithm achieves low regret by learning a bidding policy that chooses bids as a function of the context and the state of the system, which will be the time elapsed since the last win (or conversion). View details 34 35 36 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
