 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 271 - 285 of 676 publications chip template Remove Advancing seasonal prediction of tropical cyclone activity with a hybrid AI-physics climate model Gan Zhang Megha Rao Janni Yuval Ming Zhao Environmental Research Letters (2025) Preview Preview abstract Machine learning (ML) models are successful with weather forecasting and have shown progress in climate simulations, yet leveraging them for useful climate predictions needs exploration. Here we show this feasibility using neural general circulation model (NeuralGCM), a hybrid ML-physics atmospheric model developed by Google, for seasonal predictions of large-scale atmospheric variability and Northern Hemisphere tropical cyclone (TC) activity. Inspired by physical model studies, we simplify boundary conditions, assuming sea surface temperature and sea ice follow their climatological cycle but persist anomalies present at the initialization time. With such forcings, NeuralGCM can generate 100 simulation days in ∼8 min with a single graphics processing unit while simulating realistic atmospheric circulation and TC climatology patterns. This configuration yields useful seasonal predictions (July–November) for the tropical atmosphere and various TC activity metrics. Notably, the predicted and observed TC frequency in the North Atlantic and East Pacific basins are significantly correlated during 1990–2023 (r = ∼0.7), suggesting prediction skill comparable to existing physical GCMs. Despite challenges associated with model resolution and simplified boundary forcings, the model-predicted interannual variations demonstrate significant correlations with the observed sub-basin TC tracks (p View details Diamond Circuits for Surface Codes Dripto Debroy arXiv (2025) Preview Preview abstract This short paper describes a new circuit to measure surface codes, which allows them to be implemented on the heavy-square lattice. The circuits perform far worse than the usual surface code, but are more efficient in terms of the distance they can achieve for a given number of qubits and couplers. Paper Abstract: We present and benchmark an interesting subfamily of circuits within the LUCI framework, which we refer to as diamond circuits, that implement a surface code on a Lieb or “Heavy-Square” lattice. This makes them more qubit- and measurement-efficient than previous constructions. These circuits are built around a mid-cycle state that resembles a Bravyi-Bacon-Shor surface code on the data and measurement qubits. These circuits preserve the spacelike distance of the code, but suffer a penalty in timelike distance. This could be useful in regimes where quantum computers are limited by the number of control lines or frequency collisions. View details A Foot in the Backdoor Richard Bondi Ruben Barroso Garrett Holthaus John P. Thomas (2025) Preview Preview abstract We applied systems theory control loops to the 2024 cyberattack https://nvd.nist.gov/vuln/detail/CVE-2024-3094, in which a backdoor was inserted into Linux distros by modifying the xz utils compression package. Our work illustrates how to apply STAMP, CAST, and STPA to cyberattacks, and advantages over traditional threat modeling. View details A personal health large language model for sleep and fitness coaching Justin Khasentino Anastasiya Belyaeva Xin Liu Zhun Yang Nick Furlotte Chace Lee Erik Schenck Yojan Patel Jian Cui Logan Schneider Robby Bryant Ryan Gomes Allen Jiang Roy Lee Yun Liu Javier Perez Jamie Rogers Cathy Speed Shyam Tailor Megan Walker Jeffrey Yu Tim Althoff Conor Heneghan John Hernandez Mark Malhotra Leor Stern Yossi Matias Greg Corrado Shwetak Patel Shravya Shetty Jiening Zhan Shruthi Prabhakara Daniel McDuff Cory McLean Nature Medicine (2025) Preview Preview abstract Although large language models (LLMs) show promise for clinical healthcare applications, their utility for personalized health monitoring using wearable device data remains underexplored. Here we introduce the Personal Health Large Language Model (PH-LLM), designed for applications in sleep and fitness. PH-LLM is a version of the Gemini LLM that was finetuned for text understanding and reasoning when applied to aggregated daily-resolution numerical sensor data. We created three benchmark datasets to assess multiple complementary aspects of sleep and fitness: expert domain knowledge, generation of personalized insights and recommendations and prediction of self-reported sleep quality from longitudinal data. PH-LLM achieved scores that exceeded a sample of human experts on multiple-choice examinations in sleep medicine (79% versus 76%) and fitness (88% versus 71%). In a comprehensive evaluation involving 857 real-world case studies, PH-LLM performed similarly to human experts for fitness-related tasks and improved over the base Gemini model in providing personalized sleep insights. Finally, PH-LLM effectively predicted self-reported sleep quality using a multimodal encoding of wearable sensor data, further demonstrating its ability to effectively contextualize wearable modalities. This work highlights the potential of LLMs to revolutionize personal health monitoring via tailored insights and predictions from wearable data and provides datasets, rubrics and benchmark performance to further accelerate personal health-related LLM research. View details Thing2Reality: Enabling Spontaneous Creation of 3D Objects from 2D Content using Generative AI in XR Meetings Erzhen Hu Mingyi Li Jungtaek Hong Xun Qian Alex Olwal David Kim Seongkook Heo Ruofei Du UIST '25: Proceedings of the 38th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, ACM (2025), 53:1-16 Preview Preview abstract During remote communication, participants often share both digital and physical content, such as product designs, digital assets, and environments, to enhance mutual understanding. Recent advances in augmented communication have facilitated users to swiftly create and share digital 2D copies of physical objects from video feeds into a shared space. However, conventional 2D representations of digital objects limits spatial referencing in immersive environments. To address this, we propose Thing2Reality, an Extended Reality (XR) meeting platform that facilitates spontaneous discussions of both digital and physical items during remote sessions. With Thing2Reality, users can quickly materialize ideas or objects in immersive environments and share them as conditioned multiview renderings or 3D Gaussians. Thing2Reality enables users to interact with remote objects or discuss concepts in a collaborative manner. Our user studies revealed that the ability to interact with and manipulate 3D representations of objects significantly enhances the efficiency of discussions, with the potential to augment discussion of 2D artifacts. View details Designing Speech Technologies for Australian Aboriginal English: Opportunities, Risks and Participation Glenys Collard Ben Hutchinson Ned Cooper Celeste Rodriguez Louro 2025 Preview Preview abstract Settler colonialism has led to ancestral language endangerment and extinction on a mass scale. It has also forced `global' languages such as English on Indigenous communities worldwide. In Australia, post-contact languages, including creoles, and local varieties of international languages emerged as a result of forced contact with English speakers. These contact varieties are widely used, but to date they have to-date been poorly supported by language technologies. This oversight presents barriers to participation in civil and economic society for Indigenous communities using these languages. It also reproduces minoritisation of contemporary Indigenous sociolinguistic identities. This paper concerns the question of whether (and, if so, how) Indigenous people may be supported by technologies for their non-ancestral languages. We argue that multiple real-world opportunities exist, and explore this position through a case study of a project which aims to improve Automated Speech Recognition for Australian Aboriginal English. We discuss how we integrated culturally appropriate processes into the project. We call for increased support for languages used by Indigenous communities, including contact varieties, providing practical economic and socio-cultural benefits. View details Scalable In-context Ranking with Generative Models Nilesh Gupta Chong You Srinadh Bhojanapalli Sanjiv Kumar Inderjit Dhillon Felix Yu 2025 Preview Preview abstract In-context Ranking (ICR) is an emerging paradigm for Information Retrieval (IR), which leverages contextual understanding of LLMs by directly incorporating the task description, candidate documents, and the query into the model's input prompt and tasking the LLM to identify relevant document(s). While it is effective, efficiency is a significant challenge in this paradigm, especially as the candidate list grows due to quadratic/super-linear scaling of attention operation with context length. To this end, this paper first identifies inherent and exploitable structures in the attention of LLMs finetuned for ICR: (1) inter-document block sparsity: attention is dense within each document block but sparse across different documents in the context; and (2) query-document block relevance: the attention scores from certain query tokens to a document block in middle layers strongly correlate with that document's actual relevance. Motivated by these observations, we introduce BlockRank (Blockwise In-context Ranking), a novel method that adapts the attention operation in an LLM by (a) architecturally enforcing the observed inter-document block sparsity, reducing attention complexity from quadratic to linear without loss in performance, and (b) optimizing query-document block relevance for true relevant documents during fine-tuning using an auxiliary contrastive training objective, improving retrieval in attention. Experiments on BEIR, MSMarco and NQ with Mistral-7B demonstrate that BlockRank Mistral matches or outperforms existing SOTA listwise rankers and controlled fine-tuned baseline while being significantly more efficient at inference (4.7x for 100 MSMarco documents in context) and scaling gracefully to long-context shortlists, around 500 documents in-context (approximately 100K context length) within a second, presenting a scalable and effective solution for ICR. View details Design considerations in Offline Preference-based RL Teodor Marinov Chris Dann Alekh Agarwal ICML 2025 Preview Preview abstract We conduct a theoretical analysis of techniques for preference-based RL from offline datasets annotated with pairwise preferences, such as DPO. We identify key properties of the learning objective that influence the quality of the learned policy, such as the coverage of the offline dataset, the presence or absence of a normalizing baseline and the choice of loss function. Informed by the theory, we further conduct an empirical analysis of some key variants to corroborate our theoretical findings. View details Crosslingual Capabilities and Knowledge Barriers in Multilingual Large Language Models Lynn Chua Badih Ghazi Yangsibo Huang Pritish Kamath Ravi Kumar Pasin Manurangsi Amer Sinha Chulin Xie Chiyuan Zhang COLM (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs) are typically multilingual due to pretraining on diverse multilingual corpora. But can these models relate corresponding concepts across languages, i.e., be crosslingual? This study evaluates state-of-the-art LLMs on inherently crosslingual tasks. We observe that while these models show promising surface-level crosslingual abilities on machine translation and embedding space analyses, they struggle with deeper crosslingual knowledge transfer, revealing a crosslingual knowledge barrier in both general (MMLU benchmark) and domain-specific (Harry Potter quiz and TOFU benchmark) contexts. Since simple inference-time mitigation methods offer only limited improvement, we propose fine-tuning of LLMs on mixed-language data, which effectively reduces these gaps, even when using out-of-domain datasets like WikiText. Our findings suggest the need for explicit optimization to unlock the full crosslingual potential of LLMs. Our code is available at https://github.com/google-research/crosslingual-knowledge-barriers. View details Statistical Separations: When do Transformers outperform feed forward and recurrent networks? Alireza Mousavi-Hosseini Clayton Sanford Denny Wu Murat Erdogdu 2025 Preview Preview abstract While prior works focused on the computational separation between Transformers and fully connected networks, here we focus on a purely statistical separation, and ask: What function class can Transformers learn with fewer samples compared to fully connected networks, even with infinite compute? We define a toy task---q-sparse token retrieval---and prove that the sample complexities of transformers that solve this task is smaller than those of feedforward and recurrent neural networks. View details Towards AI-assisted academic writing Dan Liebling Malcolm Kane Madeleine Grunde-McLaughlin Ian Lang Subhashini Venugopalan Michael Brenner Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on AI and Scientific Discovery: Directions and Opportunities, Association for Computational Linguistics (2025), pp. 31-45 Preview Preview abstract We present components of an AI-assisted academic writing system including citation recommendation and introduction writing. The system recommends citations by considering the user’s current document context to provide relevant suggestions. It generates introductions in a structured fashion, situating the contributions of the research relative to prior work. We demonstrate the effectiveness of the components through quantitative evaluations. Finally, the paper presents qualitative research exploring how researchers incorporate citations into their writing workflows. Our findings indicate that there is demand for precise AI-assisted writing systems and simple, effective methods for meeting those needs. View details A multi-target DMRG-X algorithm for circuit-QED system modeling Guifre Vidal Sofia Garcia Aaron Szasz Alice Pagano Dvir Kafri Agustin Di Paolo 2025 Preview Preview abstract Obtaining accurate representations of the eigenstates of an array of coupled superconducting qubits is a crucial step in the design of circuit quantum electrodynamics (circuit-QED)-based quantum processors. However, exact diagonalization of the device Hamiltonian is challenging for system sizes beyond tens of qubits. Here, we employ a tensor network method based on the density matrix renormalization group (DMRG) algorithm, DMRG-X, to efficiently obtain localized eigenstates of a 2D transmon array without the need to first compute lower-energy states. We also introduce MTDMRG-X, a new algorithm that combines DMRG-X with multi-target DMRG to efficiently compute excited states even in regimes with strong eigenstate hybridization. We showcase the use of these methods for the analysis of long-range couplings in a multi-transmon Hamiltonian including qubits and couplers, and we discuss eigenstate localization. These developments facilitate the design and parameter optimization of large-scale superconducting quantum processors. View details Enhancing Column Average CO2 tracking with GOES East Aarón Sonabend Vishal Batchu Carl Elkin Christopher Van Arsdale John Platt Anna Michalak (2025) Preview Preview abstract The need for characterizing global variability of atmospheric carbon dioxide (CO2) is quickly increasing, with a growing urgency for tracking greenhouse gasses with sufficient resolution, precision and accuracy so as to support independent verification of CO2 fluxes at local to global scales. The current generation of space-based sensors, however, can only provide sparse observations in space and/or in time, by design. While upcoming missions may address some of these challenges, most are still years away from launch. This challenge has fueled interest in the potential use of data from existing missions originally developed for other applications for inferring global greenhouse gas variability. The Advanced Baseline Imager (ABI) onboard the Geostationary Operational Environmental Satellite (GOES-East), operational since 2017, provides full coverage of much of the western hemisphere at 10-minute intervals from geostationary orbit at 16 wavelengths. We leverage this high temporal resolution by developing a single-pixel, fully-connected neural network to estimate dry-air column CO2 mole fractions (XCO2). The model employs a time series of GOES-East's 16 spectral bands, which aids in disentangling atmospheric CO2 from surface reflectance, alongside ECMWF ERA5 lower tropospheric meteorology, solar angles, and day of year. Training used collocated GOES-East and OCO-2/OCO-3 observations (2017-2020, within 5 km and 10 minutes), with validation and testing performed on 2021 data. The model successfully captures monthly latitudinal XCO2 gradients and shows reasonable agreement with ground-based TCCON measurements. Furthermore, we demonstrate the model's ability to detect elevated XCO2 signals from high-emitting power plants, particularly over low-reflectance surfaces. We also confirm that removing bands 5 (1.6 µm) and 16 (13.3 µm) substantially decreases performance, indicating that the model is able to extract useful information from these bands. Although GOES-East derived XCO2 precision may not rival dedicated instruments, its unprecedented combination of contiguous geographic coverage, 10-minute temporal frequency, and multi-year record offers the potential to observe aspects of atmospheric CO2 variability currently unseen from space, with further potential through spatio-temporal aggregation. View details Depth-Width tradeoffs in Algorithmic Reasoning of Graph Tasks with Transformers Gilad Yehudai Clayton Sanford Maya Bechler-Speicher Orr Fischer Ran Gilad-Bachrach Amir Globerson 2025 Preview Preview abstract In particular, they can be used to solve complex algorithmic problems, including graph-based tasks. In such algorithmic tasks a key question is what is the minimal size of a transformer that can implement a task. Recent work has begun to explore this problem for graph-based tasks, showing that for sub-linear embedding dimension (i.e., model width) logarithmic depth suffices. However, an open question, which we address here, is what happens if width is allowed to grow linearly. Here we analyze this setting, and provide the surprising result that with linear width, constant depth suffices for solving a host of graph-based problems. This suggests that a moderate increase in width can allow much shallower models, which are advantageous in terms of inference time. For other problems, we show that quadratic width is required. Our results demonstrate the complex and intriguing landscape of transformer implementations of graph-based algorithms. We support our theoretical results with empirical evaluations. View details Improved FPT Approximation Scheme and Approximate Kernel for Biclique-Free Max k-Weight SAT: Greedy Strikes Back Pasin Manurangsi Theoretical Computer Science, 1028 (2025) Preview Preview abstract In the Max k-Weight SAT (aka Max SAT with Cardinality Constraint) problem, we are given a CNF formula with n variables and m clauses together with a positive integer k. The goal is to find an assignment where at most k variables are set to one that satisfies as many constraints as possible. Recently, Jain et al. (SODA 2023) gave an FPT approximation scheme (FPT-AS) with running time 2^O((dk/ε)^d) * (n + m)^O(1) for Max k-Weight SAT when the incidence graph is K_{d,d}-free. They asked whether a polynomial-size approximate kernel exists. In this work, we answer this question positively by giving an (1 − ε)-approximate kernel with (dk/ε)^O(d) variables. This also implies an improved FPT-AS with running time (dk/ε)^O(dk) * (n+m)^O(1)-time algorithm for the problem. Our approximate kernel is based mainly on a couple of greedy strategies together with a sunflower lemma-style reduction rule. View details 19 20 21 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
