 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 91 - 105 of 676 publications chip template Remove Quantum simulation with sum-of-squares spectral amplification Robbie King Guang Hao Low Ryan Babbush Rolando Somma Nicholas Rubin arXiv:2505.01528 (2025) Preview Preview abstract We introduce sum-of-squares spectral amplification (SOSSA), a framework for improving quantum simulation algorithms relevant to low-energy problems. SOSSA first represents the Hamiltonian as a sum-of-squares and then applies spectral amplification to amplify the low-energy spectrum. The sum-of-squares representation can be obtained using semidefinite programming. We show that SOSSA can improve the efficiency of traditional methods in several simulation tasks involving low-energy states. Specifically, we provide fast quantum algorithms for energy and phase estimation that improve over the state-of-the-art in both query and gate complexities, complementing recent results on fast time evolution of low-energy states. To further illustrate the power of SOSSA, we apply it to the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model, a representative strongly correlated system, where we demonstrate asymptotic speedups by a factor of the square root of the system size. Notably, SOSSA was recently used in [G.H. Low \textit{et al.}, arXiv:2502.15882 (2025)] to achieve state-of-art costs for phase estimation of real-world quantum chemistry systems. View details Binamix -- A Python Library for Generating Binaural Audio Datasets Dan Barry Davoud Shariat Panah Alessandro Ragano Jan Skoglund Andrew Hines AES 158th Audio Engineering Society Convention (2025) Preview Preview abstract The increasing demand for spatial audio in applications such as virtual reality, immersive media, and spatial audio research necessitates robust solutions to generate binaural audio data sets for use in testing and validation. Binamix is an open-source Python library designed to facilitate programmatic binaural mixing using the extensive SADIE II Database, which provides Head Related Impulse Response (HRIR) and Binaural Room Impulse Response (BRIR) data for 20 subjects. The Binamix library provides a flexible and repeatable framework for creating large-scale spatial audio datasets, making it an invaluable resource for codec evaluation, audio quality metric development, and machine learning model training. A range of pre-built example scripts, utility functions, and visualization plots further streamline the process of custom pipeline creation. This paper presents an overview of the library’s capabilities, including binaural rendering, impulse response interpolation, and multi-track mixing for various speaker layouts. The tools utilize a modified Delaunay triangulation technique to achieve accurate HRIR/BRIR interpolation where desired angles are not present in the data. By supporting a wide range of parameters such as azimuth, elevation, subject Impulse Responses (IRs), speaker layouts, mixing controls, and more, the library enables researchers to create large binaural datasets for any downstream purpose. Binamix empowers researchers and developers to advance spatial audio applications with reproducible methodologies by offering an open-source solution for binaural rendering and dataset generation. We release the library under the Apache 2.0 License at https://github.com/QxLabIreland/Binamix/ View details On the Design of the Binaural Rendering Library for Eclipsa Audio Immersive Audio Container Tomasz Rudzki Gavin Kearney Jan Skoglund AES 158th Convention of the Audio Engineering Society (2025) Preview Preview abstract Immersive Audio Media and Formats (IAMF), also known as Eclipsa Audio, is an open-source audio container developed to accommodate multichannel and scene-based audio formats. Headphone-based delivery of IAMF audio requires efficient binaural rendering. This paper introduces the Open Binaural Renderer (OBR), which is designed to render IAMF audio. It discusses the core rendering algorithm, the binaural filter design process as well as real-time implementation of the renderer in a form of an open-source C++ rendering library. Designed for multi-platform compatibility, the renderer incorporates a novel approach to binaural audio processing, leveraging a combination of spherical harmonic (SH) based virtual listening room model and anechoic binaural filters. Through its design, the IAMF binaural renderer provides a robust solution for delivering high-quality immersive audio across diverse platforms and applications. View details Perceptual Audio Coding: A 40-Year Historical Perspective Juergen Herre Schuyler Quackenbush Minje Kim Jan Skoglund 2025 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP) (2025) Preview Preview abstract In the history of audio and acoustic signal processing perceptual audio coding has certainly excelled as a bright success story by its ubiquitous deployment in virtually all digital media devices, such as computers, tablets, mobile phones, set-top-boxes, and digital radios. From a technology perspective, perceptual audio coding has undergone tremendous development from the first very basic perceptually driven coders (including the popular mp3 format) to today’s full-blown integrated coding/rendering systems. This paper provides a historical overview of this research journey by pinpointing the pivotal development steps in the evolution of perceptual audio coding. Finally, it provides thoughts about future directions in this area. View details Perceptual Evaluation of a Mix Presentation for Immersive Audio with IAMF Carlos Tejeda-Ocampo Toni Hirvonen Ema Souza-Blanes Mahmoud Namazi Jan Skoglund AES 158th Convention of the Audio Engineering Society (2025) Preview Preview abstract Immersive audio mix presentations involve transmitting and rendering several audio elements simultaneously. This enables next-generation applications, such as personalized playback. Using immersive loudspeaker and headphone MUSHRA tests, we investigate bitrate vs. quality for a typical mix presentation use case of a foreground stereo element, plus a background Ambisonics scene. For coding, we use Immersive Audio Model and Formats, a recently proposed system for Next-Generation Audio. Excellent quality is achieved at 384 kbit/s even with reasonable amount of personalization. We also propose a framework for content-aware analysis that can significantly reduce the bitrate when using underlying legacy audio coding instances. View details Neural Speech and Audio Coding Jan Skoglund Minje Kim IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 41 (2025), pp. 85-93 Preview Preview abstract This paper explores the integration of model-based and data-driven approaches within the realm of neural speech and audio coding systems. It highlights the challenges posed by the subjective evaluation processes of speech and audio codecs and discusses the limitations of purely data-driven approaches, which often require inefficiently large architectures to match the performance of model-based methods. The study presents hybrid systems as a viable solution, offering significant improvements to the performance of conventional codecs through meticulously chosen design enhancements. Specifically, it introduces a neural network-based signal enhancer designed to post-process existing codecs’ output, along with the autoencoder-based end-to-end models and LPCNet—hybrid systems that combine linear predictive coding (LPC) with neural networks. Furthermore, the paper delves into predictive models operating within custom feature spaces (TF-Codec) or predefined transform domains (MDCTNet) and examines the use of psychoacoustically calibrated loss functions to train end-to-end neural audio codecs. Through these investigations, the paper demonstrates the potential of hybrid systems to advance the field of speech and audio coding by bridging the gap between traditional model-based approaches and modern data-driven techniques. View details Steerable Chatbots: Personalizing LLMs with Preference-Based Activation Steering Jessica Bo Tianyu Xu Ishan Chatterjee Katrina Passarella Ace Kulshrestha D Shin 2025 Preview Preview abstract As large language models (LLMs) improve in their capacity to serve as personal AI assistants, their ability to output uniquely tailored, personalized responses that align with the soft preferences of their users is imperative for maximizing user satisfaction and retention. However, lay users are notoriously bad at prompt specification and often struggle with conveying their latent preferences to AI assistants. To resolve this, we demonstrate that activation steering, an inference-time method, can effectively control the response of the LLMs towards expressing different preferences. In contrast to memory-based personalization methods that require long user history, steering is extremely lightweight and easily-controllable via an interpretable linear strength factor. We further conduct a within-subjects user study (n=14) to investigate how end users personalize their conversations through three different steerable chatbot interfaces. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of preference-based steering for aligning real-world conversations with user preferences, and we discuss qualitative findings on how diverse values around control, transparency, and usability of personalization lead users to prefer different interfaces. View details Ransomware over Modern Web Browsers: A Novel Strain and A New Defense Mechanism Harun Oz Güliz Seray Tuncay Ahmet Aris Leonardo Babun Selcuk Uluagac Abbas Acar ACM Transactions on the Web (2025) Preview Preview abstract Ransomware is an increasingly prevalent form of malware targeting end-users, governments, and businesses. As it has evolved, adversaries added new capabilities to their arsenal. Throughout the ransomware evolution, the adversaries propose a next-generation browser-based ransomware, RøB, that performs its malicious actions via emerging web technologies, File System Access API (FSA) and WebAssembly (Wasm). RøB uses this API through the victims’ browsers; hence, it does not require the victims to download and install malicious binaries. We performed extensive evaluations with 3 different OSs, 23 file formats, 29 distinct directories, 5 cloud providers, and 4 antivirus solutions. Our evaluations show that RøB can encrypt various types of files in the local and cloud-integrated directories, external storage devices, and network-shared folders of victims. Our experiments also reveal that popular cloud solutions, Box Individual and Apple iCloud can be severely affected by RøB. Moreover, we conducted tests with commercial antivirus software such as AVG, Avast, Kaspersky, Malware Bytes that perform sensitive directory and suspicious behavior monitoring against ransomware. We verified that RøB can evade these antivirus software and encrypt victim files. Moreover, existing ransomware detection solutions in the literature also cannot be a remedy against RøB due to its distinct features. Therefore, in this paper, we also propose broguard, a new detection system for RøB-like attacks. broguard monitors the web applications that use the FSA API via function hooking and uses a machine learning classifier to detect RøB-like attacks in real-time without any file loss. Performance evaluations of broguard on a comprehensive dataset show that broguard can detect RøB-like browser-based ransomware attacks with over 99% accuracy and minimal overhead. View details Necro-reaper: Pruning away Dead Memory Traffic in Warehouse-Scale Computers Sotiris Apostolakis Chris Kennelly David Li Parthasarathy Ranganathan Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Association for Computing Machinery (2025) Preview Preview abstract Memory bandwidth is emerging as a critical bottleneck in warehouse-scale computing (WSC). This work reveals that a significant portion of memory traffic in WSC is surprisingly unnecessary, consisting of unnecessary writebacks of deallocated data and fetches of uninitialized data. This issue is particularly acute in WSC, where short-lived heap allocations bigger than a cache line are prevalent. To address this problem, this work proposes a pragmatic approach tailored to WSC. Leveraging the existing WSC ecosystem of vertical integration, profile-guided compilation flows, and customized memory allocators, this work presents Necro-reaper, a novel software/hardware co-design that avoids dead memory traffic without requiring the hardware tracking of prior work. New ISA instructions enable the hardware to avoid unnecessary dead traffic, while extended software components, including a profile-guided compiler and memory allocator, optimize the utilization of these instructions. Evaluation across a diverse set of 10 WSC workloads demonstrates that Necro-reaper achieves a geomean memory traffic reduction of 26% and a geomean IPC increase of 6%. View details Opportunities and Applications of GenAI in Smart Cities: A User-Centric Survey Ankit Shetgaonkar Dipen Pradhan Lakshit Arora Sanjay Surendranath Girija Shashank Kapoor Aman Raj IEEE COINS (2025) Preview Preview abstract The proliferation of IoT in cities, combined with Digital Twins, creates a rich data foundation for Smart Cities aimed at improving urban life and operations. Generative AI (GenAI) significantly enhances this potential, moving beyond traditional AI analytics by processing multimodal content and generating novel outputs like text and simulations. Using specialized or foundational models, GenAI's natural language abilities such as Natural Language Understanding (NLU) and Generation (NLG) can power tailored applications and unified interfaces, dramatically lowering barriers for users interacting with complex smart city systems. In this paper, we focus on GenAI applications based on conversational interfaces within the context of three critical user archetypes in a Smart City - Citizens, Operators and Planners. We identify and review GenAI models and techniques that have been proposed or deployed for various urban subsystems in the contexts of these user archetypes. We also consider how GenAI can be built on the existing data foundation of official city records, IoT data streams and Urban Digital Twins. We believe this work represents the first comprehensive summarization of GenAI techniques for Smart Cities from the lens of the critical users in a Smart City. View details Explainable Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Software Development Lifecycle: A phase-specific survey Lakshit Arora Sanjay Surendranath Girija Shashank Kapoor Aman Raj Dipen Pradhan Ankit Shetgaonkar IEEE Compsac (2025) Preview Preview abstract Artificial Intelligence (AI) is rapidly expanding and integrating more into daily life to automate tasks, guide decision-making and enhance efficiency. However, complex AI models, which make decisions without providing clear explanations (known as the "black-box problem"), currently restrict trust and widespread adoption of AI. Explainable Artificial intelligence (XAI) has emerged to address the black-box problem of making AI systems more interpretable and transparent so stakeholders can trust, verify, and act upon AI-based outcomes. Researcher have come up with various techniques to foster XAI in Software Development Lifecycle. However, there are gaps in the application of XAI in Software Engineering phases. Literature shows that 68% of XAI in Software Engineering research focused on maintenance as opposed to 8% on software management and requirements [7]. In this paper we present a comprehensive survey of the applications of XAI methods (e.g., concept-based explanations, LIME/SHAP, rule extraction, attention mechanisms, counterfactual explanations, example-based explanations) to the different phases of Software Development Lifecycles (SDLC) mainly requirements elicitation, design and development, testing and deployment, and evolution. To the best of our knowledge, this paper presents the first comprehensive survey of XAI techniques for every phase of the Software Development Life Cycle (SDLC). In doing so, we aim to promote explainable AI in Software Engineering and facilitate the use of complex AI models in AI-driven software development. View details Optimizing LLMs for Resource-Constrained Environments: A Survey of Model Compression Techniques Sanjay Surendranath Girija Shashank Kapoor Lakshit Arora Dipen Pradhan Aman Raj Ankit Shetgaonkar IEEE Compsac 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large Language Models (LLMs) are revolutionizing many areas of AI, but their substantial resource requirements limit their deployment on mobile and edge devices. This survey paper provides a comprehensive overview of techniques for compressing LLMs to enable efficient inference in resource-constrained environments. We examine three primary approaches: knowledge distillation, model quantization and model pruning. For each technique, we discuss the underlying principles, present different forms, and provide examples of successful applications. We also briefly discuss complementary techniques like mixture-of-experts and early exit strategies and highlight the promising future directions. We aim to provide a valuable resource for both researchers and practitioners seeking to optimize LLMs for edge deployment. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper that provides a focused survey of LLM compression techniques from the lens of resource-constrained environments. View details AI and Generative AI Transforming Disaster Management: A Survey of Damage Assessment and Response Techniques Aman Raj Lakshit Arora Sanjay Surendranath Girija Shashank Kapoor Dipen Pradhan Ankit Shetgaonkar IEEE Compsac 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Natural disasters, including earthquakes, wildfires and cyclones, bear a huge risk on human lives as well as infrastructure assets. An effective response to disaster depends on the ability to rapidly and efficiently assess the intensity of damage. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) presents a breakthrough solution, capable of combining knowledge from multiple types and sources of data, simulating realistic scenarios of disaster, and identifying emerging trends at a speed previously unimaginable. In this paper, we present a comprehensive review on the prospects of AI and GenAI in damage assessment for various natural disasters, highlighting both its strengths and limitations. We talk about its application to multimodal data such as text, image, video, and audio, and also cover major issues of data privacy, security, and ethical use of the technology during crises. The paper also recognizes the threat of Generative AI misuse, in the form of dissemination of misinformation and for adversarial attacks. Finally, we outline avenues of future research, emphasizing the need for secure, reliable, and ethical Generative AI systems for disaster management in general. We believe that this work represents the first comprehensive survey of Gen-AI techniques being used in the field of Disaster Assessment and Response. View details Adversarial Attacks in Multimodal Systems: A Practitioner's Survey Shashank Kapoor Sanjay Surendranath Girija Lakshit Arora Dipen Pradhan Ankit Shetgaonkar Aman Raj IEEE Compsac 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Multimodal models represent a significant advancement in Artificial Intelligence. A single model is trained to understand unstructured modalities: text, image, video, and audio. Open-source variants of multimodal models have made these breakthroughs further accessible. ML practitioners adopt, finetune, and deploy open-source models in real-world applications. However, considering the vast landscape of adversarial attacks across these modalities, these models also inherit vulnerabilities of all the modalities, and eventually, the adversarial threat amplifies. While broad research is available on possible attacks within or across these modalities, a practitioner-focused view of outlining attack types remains absent in the multimodal world. This paper addresses the gap by surveying adversarial attacks targeting all four modalities: text, image, video, and audio. This survey provides a view of the adversarial attack landscape and presents how multimodal adversarial threats have evolved. To the best of our knowledge, this survey is the first comprehensive summarization of the threat landscape in the multimodal world. View details LeakyFeeder: In-Air Gesture Control Through Leaky Acoustic Waves Yongjie Yang Tao Chen Zhenlin An Shirui Cao Van Fan Shangguan Longfei SenSys 2025 - The 23rd ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems (2025) Preview Preview abstract We present LeekyFeeder, a mobile application that explores the acoustic signals leaked from headphones to reconstruct gesture motions around the ear for fine-grained gesture control. To achieve this goal, LeekyFeeder reuses the speaker and feed-forward microphones on active noise cancellation (ANC) headphones as a SONAR system, emitting an inaudible frequency-modulated continuous-wave (FMCW) signal to track gesture reflections over time. Since this single-receiver SONAR system is unable to differentiate reflection angles and further disentangle signal reflections from different gesture parts, we draw on principles of multi-modal learning to frame gesture motion reconstruction as a multi-modal translation task and propose a deep learning-based approach to fill the information gap between low-dimensional FMCW ranging readings and high-dimensional 3D hand movements. We implement LeekyFeeder on a pair of Google Pixel Buds and conduct experiments to examine the efficacy and robustness of LeekyFeeder in various conditions. Experiments based on six gesture types inspired by Apple Vision Pro demonstrate that LeekyFeeder achieves a PCK performance of 89% at 3cm across ten users, with an average MPJPE and MPJRPE error of 2.71cm and 1.88cm, respectively. View details 7 8 9 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
