 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 1 - 15 of 676 publications chip template Remove Towards conversational artificial intelligence for disease management Valentin Liévin Anil Palepu Wei-Hung Weng Khaled Saab David Stutz Yong Cheng Kavita Kulkarni Sara Mahdavi Joelle Barral Dale Webster Avinatan Hassidim Yossi Matias James Manyika Ryutaro Tanno Vivek Natarajan Adam Rodman Tao Tu Alan Karthikesalingam Mike Schaekermann Nature (2026) Preview Preview abstract Although large language models have shown promise in diagnostic dialogue, their capabilities for effective management reasoning, including disease progression, therapeutic response and safe medication prescription, have remained underexplored. We have advanced the previously demonstrated diagnostic capabilities of the Articulate Medical Intelligence Explorer (AMIE) using a new large-language-model-based agentic system optimized for multivisit clinical management and dialogue. To ground the reasoning of AMIE in authoritative clinical knowledge, we leveraged the long-context capabilities of Gemini, combining in-context retrieval with structured reasoning to align its output with up-to-date clinical practice guidelines and drug formularies. In a randomized, blinded virtual Objective Structured Clinical Examination study, AMIE was compared to 21 primary care physicians (PCPs) across 100 multivisit case scenarios designed to reflect the guidance of the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence and BMJ Best Practice guidelines. AMIE was non-inferior to PCPs in management reasoning, as assessed by specialists, and scored better both with respect to preciseness of treatment and investigation, and in terms of its alignment with and grounding in clinical guidelines. To benchmark medication reasoning, we developed RxQA, a multiple-choice question benchmark that was derived from two national drug formularies (from the USA and UK) and validated by board-certified pharmacists. Although AMIE and PCPs both benefited from the ability to access external drug information, AMIE outperformed PCPs on higher-difficulty questions. Although further research will be needed before real-world translation of AMIE, its strong performance across evaluations marks a significant step towards use of conversational artificial intelligence as a tool in disease management. View details Multi-Agent Design: Optimizing Agents with Better Prompts and Topologies Han Zhou Xingchen Wan Ruoxi Sun Hamid Palangi Shariq Iqbal Ivan Vulić Anna Korhonen Sercan Arik International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2026) Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs), employed as multiple agents that interact and collaborate with each other, have excelled at solving complex tasks. The agents are programmed with {prompts} that declare their functionality, along with the {workflows} that orchestrate interactions within a structured flow. Designing prompts and workflows for multi-agent systems is inherently complex, especially when addressing a new task. It often demands expert-level knowledge and involves significant trial and error. Gaining a deep understanding of the factors that contribute to effective multi-agent systems is essential for automating the entire process. Motivated by this, we first conduct an in-depth analysis of the design spaces for multi-agent systems, focusing on the impact of prompts, scaling the number of agents, and common types of agentic modules. Our findings reveal that top-performing systems often emerge from simpler design spaces, where prompts play a critical role in enhancing agent functionality and enabling more effective scaling. Based on the insights, we propose Multi-Agent System Search (MASS), a multi-stage optimization framework that performs the optimization in a pruned design space, with prompts and an influential subset of modules. We show that MASS-optimized multi-agent systems outperform existing alterntives by a substantial margin. Based on the MASS-found systems, we finally propose design principles behind building effective multi-agent systems. View details On-the-Fly OVD Adaptation with FLAME: Few-shot Localization via Active Marginal-Samples Exploration Yehonathan Refael Amit Aides Aviad Barzilai George Leifman Vered Silverman Bolous Jaber Tomer Shekel Genady Beryozkin Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) Workshops (2026), pp. 886-894 Preview Preview abstract Open-vocabulary object detection (OVD) models offer remarkable flexibility applications by enabling object detection from arbitrary text queries. Still, the zero-shot performance of the pre-trained models is hampered by the inherent semantic ambiguity of natural language, result to low precision, leading to insufficient crucial downstream applications. For instance, in the remote sensing (RS) domain, a query for "ship" can yield varied and contextually irrelevant results. To address this, for real time applications, we propose a novel cascaded architecture that synergizes the broad capabilities of a large, pre-trained OVD model with a lightweight, few-shot classifier. Our approach utilizes the frozen weights of the zero-shot model to generate initial, high-recall object-embedding proposals, which are then refined by a compact classifier trained in real-time on a handful of user-annotated examples. The core of our contribution is an efficient one step active learning strategy for selecting the most informative samples for user annotation. Our method identifies (extremely) small amount of an uncertain candidates near the theoretical decision boundary using density estimation and then applies clustering to ensure a diverse training set. This targeted sampling enables our cascaded system to elevate performance on standard remote sensing benchmarks. Our work thus presents a practical and resource-efficient framework for adapting foundational models to specific user needs, drastically reducing annotation overhead while achieving high accuracy without costly full-model fine-tuning. View details How Tech Workers Contend with Hazards of Humanlikeness in Generative AI Mark Díaz Renee Shelby Eric Corbett Andrew Smart Proceedings of the 2026 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM (2026), pp. 1-18 Preview Preview abstract Generative AI’s humanlike qualities are driving its rapid adoption in professional domains. However, this anthropomorphic appeal raises concerns from HCI and responsible AI scholars about potential hazards and harms, such as overtrust in system outputs. To investigate how technology workers navigate these humanlike qualities and anticipate emergent harms, we conducted focus groups with 30 professionals across six job functions (ML engineering, product policy, UX research and design, product management, technology writing, and communications). Our findings reveal an unsettled knowledge environment surrounding humanlike generative AI, where workers’ varying perspectives illuminate a range of potential risks for individuals, knowledge work fields, and society. We argue that workers require comprehensive support, including clearer conceptions of “humanlikeness” to effectively mitigate these risks. To aid in mitigation strategies, we provide a conceptual map articulating the identified hazards and their connection to conflated notions of “humanlikeness.” View details An AI system to help scientists write expert-level empirical software Eser Aygün Anastasiya Belyaeva Gheorghe Comanici Marc Coram Hao Cui Jake Garrison Renee Johnston Anton Kast Cory McLean Peter Norgaard Zahra Shamsi David Smalling James Thompson Subhashini Venugopalan Brian Williams Sarah Martinson Martyna Plomecka Lai Wei Yuchen Zhou Qian-Ze Zhu Matthew Abraham Erica Brand Anna Bulanova Jeffrey Cardille Chris Co Scott Ellsworth Grace Joseph Malcolm Kane Ryan Krueger Johan Kartiwa Dan Liebling Jackson Cui Jan-Matthis Lückmann Paul Raccuglia Julie Wang Kat Chou James Manyika Yossi Matias John Platt Lizzie Dorfman Shibl Mourad Michael Brenner Nature (2026) Preview Preview abstract The cycle of scientific discovery is frequently bottlenecked by the slow, manual creation of software to support computational experiments. To address this, we present Empirical Research Assistance (ERA), an AI system that creates expert-level scientific software whose goal is to maximize a quality metric. The system uses a Large Language Model (LLM) and Tree Search (TS) to systematically improve the quality metric and intelligently navigate the large space of possible solutions. ERA achieves expert-level results when it explores and integrates complex research ideas from external sources. The effectiveness of tree search is demonstrated across a diverse range of tasks. In bioinformatics, ERA discovered 40 novel methods for single-cell data analysis that outperformed the top human-developed methods on a public leaderboard. In epidemiology, ERA generated 14 models that outperformed the CDC ensemble and all other individual models for forecasting COVID-19 hospitalizations. ERA also produced expert-level software for geospatial analysis, neural activity prediction in zebrafish, and numerical solution of integrals, and a novel rule-based construction for time series forecasting. By devising and implementing novel solutions to diverse tasks, ERA represents a significant step towards accelerating scientific progress. Keywords: Tree Search, Generative AI, Scorable Scientific Tasks, Empirical Software View details Quantum Computing for Programmers, 2nd Edition Robert Hundt Cambridge University Press, Cambridge CB2 8BS, United Kingdom (2025) Preview Preview abstract This introduction to quantum computing from a classical programmer's perspective is meant for students and practitioners alike. More than 50 quantum techniques and algorithms are explained with mathematical derivations and code for simulation, using an open-source code base in Python and C++. New material throughout this fully revised and expanded second edition includes new chapters on Quantum Machine Learning, State Preparation, and Similarity Tests. Coverage includes algorithms exploiting entanglement, black-box algorithms, the quantum Fourier transform, phase estimation, quantum walks, and foundational QML algorithms. Readers will find detailed, easy-to-follow derivations and implementations of Shor's algorithm, Grover's algorithm, SAT3, graph coloring, the Solovay-Kitaev algorithm, Moettoenen's algorithm, quantum mean, median, and minimum finding, Deutsch's algorithm, Bernstein-Vazirani, quantum teleportation and superdense coding, the CHSH game, and, from QML, the HHL algorithm, Euclidean distance, and PCA. The book also discusses productivity issues like quantum noise, error correction, quantum programming languages, compilers, and techniques for transpilation. View details The Discrete Adiabatic Quantum Linear System Solver has Lower Constant factors than the Randomized Adiabatic Solver Pedro C. S. Costa Dong An Ryan Babbush Dominic Berry Quantum, 9 (2025), pp. 1887 Preview Preview abstract The solution of linear systems of equations is the basis of many other quantum algorithms, and recent results provided an algorithm with optimal scaling in both the condition number κ and the allowable error ϵ [PRX Quantum 3, 0403003 (2022)]. That work was based on the discrete adiabatic theorem, and worked out an explicit constant factor for an upper bound on the complexity. Here we show via numerical testing on random matrices that the constant factor is in practice about 1,200 times smaller than the upper bound found numerically in the previous results. That means that this approach is far more efficient than might naively be expected from the upper bound. In particular, it is over an order of magnitude more efficient than using a randomized approach from [arXiv:2305.11352] that claimed to be more efficient. View details InstructPipe: Generating Visual Blocks Pipelines with Human Instructions and LLMs Zhongyi Zhou Jing Jin Vrushank Phadnis Xiuxiu Yuan Jun Jiang Xun Qian Jingtao Zhou Yiyi Huang Zheng Xu Yinda Zhang Kristen Wright Jason Mayes Mark Sherwood Johnny Lee Alex Olwal David Kim Ram Iyengar Na Li Ruofei Du Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI), ACM, pp. 23 Preview Preview abstract Visual programming has the potential of providing novice programmers with a low-code experience to build customized processing pipelines. Existing systems typically require users to build pipelines from scratch, implying that novice users are expected to set up and link appropriate nodes from a blank workspace. In this paper, we introduce InstructPipe, an AI assistant for prototyping machine learning (ML) pipelines with text instructions. We contribute two large language model (LLM) modules and a code interpreter as part of our framework. The LLM modules generate pseudocode for a target pipeline, and the interpreter renders the pipeline in the node-graph editor for further human-AI collaboration. Both technical and user evaluation (N=16) shows that InstructPipe empowers users to streamline their ML pipeline workflow, reduce their learning curve, and leverage open-ended commands to spark innovative ideas. View details Accurate human genome analysis with Element Avidity sequencing Andrew Carroll Alexey Kolesnikov Daniel Cook Lucas Brambrink Bryan Lajoie Kelly N. Wiseman Sophie Billings Semyon Kruglyak Bryan R. Lajoie Junhua Zhao Shawn E. Levy Cory McLean Kishwar Shafin Maria Nattestad Pi-Chuan Chang BMC Bioinformatics (2025) Preview Preview abstract We investigate the new sequencing technology Avidity from Element Biosciences. We show that Avidity whole genome sequencing matches mapping and variant calling accuracy with Illumina at high coverages (30x-50x) and is noticeably more accurate at lower coverages (20x-30x). We quantify base error rates of Element reads, finding lower error rates, especially in homopolymer and tandem repeat regions. We use Element’s ability to generate paired end sequencing with longer insert sizes than typical short–read sequencing. We show that longer insert sizes result in even higher accuracy, with long insert Element sequencing giving noticeably more accurate genome analyses at all coverages. View details Toward expert-level medical question answering with large language models Karan Singhal Tao Tu Juro Gottweis Rory Sayres Ellery Wulczyn Le Hou Kevin Clark Stephen Pfohl Heather Cole-Lewis Darlene Neal Mike Schaekermann Amy Wang Mohamed Amin Sami Lachgar Philip Mansfield Sushant Prakash Bradley Green Ewa Dominowska Blaise Aguera-Arcas Nenad Tomašev Yun Liu Renee Wong Christopher Semturs Sara Mahdavi Joelle Barral Dale Webster Greg Corrado Yossi Matias Shek Azizi Alan Karthikesalingam Vivek Natarajan Nature Medicine (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs) have shown promise in medical question answering, with Med-PaLM being the first to exceed a ‘passing’ score in United States Medical Licensing Examination style questions. However, challenges remain in long-form medical question answering and handling real-world workflows. Here, we present Med-PaLM 2, which bridges these gaps with a combination of base LLM improvements, medical domain fine-tuning and new strategies for improving reasoning and grounding through ensemble refinement and chain of retrieval. Med-PaLM 2 scores up to 86.5% on the MedQA dataset, improving upon Med-PaLM by over 19%, and demonstrates dramatic performance increases across MedMCQA, PubMedQA and MMLU clinical topics datasets. Our detailed human evaluations framework shows that physicians prefer Med-PaLM 2 answers to those from other physicians on eight of nine clinical axes. Med-PaLM 2 also demonstrates significant improvements over its predecessor across all evaluation metrics, particularly on new adversarial datasets designed to probe LLM limitations (P View details Towards conversational diagnostic artificial intelligence Tao Tu Mike Schaekermann Anil Palepu Khaled Saab Jan Freyberg Ryutaro Tanno Amy Wang Brenna Li Mohamed Amin Nenad Tomašev Shekoofeh Azizi Karan Singhal Yong Cheng Le Hou Albert Webson Kavita Kulkarni Sara Mahdavi Christopher Semturs Juro Gottweis Joelle Barral Kat Chou Greg Corrado Yossi Matias Alan Karthikesalingam Vivek Natarajan Nature (2025) Preview Preview abstract At the heart of medicine lies physician–patient dialogue, where skillful history-taking enables effective diagnosis, management and enduring trust. Artificial intelligence (AI) systems capable of diagnostic dialogue could increase accessibility and quality of care. However, approximating clinicians’ expertise is an outstanding challenge. Here we introduce AMIE (Articulate Medical Intelligence Explorer), a large language model (LLM)-based AI system optimized for diagnostic dialogue. AMIE uses a self-play-based simulated environment with automated feedback for scaling learning across disease conditions, specialties and contexts. We designed a framework for evaluating clinically meaningful axes of performance, including history-taking, diagnostic accuracy, management, communication skills and empathy. We compared AMIE’s performance to that of primary care physicians in a randomized, double-blind crossover study of text-based consultations with validated patient-actors similar to objective structured clinical examination. The study included 159 case scenarios from providers in Canada, the United Kingdom and India, 20 primary care physicians compared to AMIE, and evaluations by specialist physicians and patient-actors. AMIE demonstrated greater diagnostic accuracy and superior performance on 30 out of 32 axes according to the specialist physicians and 25 out of 26 axes according to the patient-actors. Our research has several limitations and should be interpreted with caution. Clinicians used synchronous text chat, which permits large-scale LLM–patient interactions, but this is unfamiliar in clinical practice. While further research is required before AMIE could be translated to real-world settings, the results represent a milestone towards conversational diagnostic AI. View details Towards accurate differential diagnosis with large language models Daniel McDuff Mike Schaekermann Tao Tu Anil Palepu Amy Wang Jake Garrison Karan Singhal Yash Sharma Shekoofeh Azizi Kavita Kulkarni Le Hou Yong Cheng Yun Liu Sara Mahdavi Sushant Prakash Anupam Pathak Christopher Semturs Shwetak Patel Dale Webster Ewa Dominowska Juro Gottweis Joelle Barral Kat Chou Greg Corrado Yossi Matias Jake Sunshine Alan Karthikesalingam Vivek Natarajan Nature (2025) Preview Preview abstract A comprehensive differential diagnosis is a cornerstone of medical care that is often reached through an iterative process of interpretation that combines clinical history, physical examination, investigations and procedures. Interactive interfaces powered by large language models present new opportunities to assist and automate aspects of this process. Here we introduce the Articulate Medical Intelligence Explorer (AMIE), a large language model that is optimized for diagnostic reasoning, and evaluate its ability to generate a differential diagnosis alone or as an aid to clinicians. Twenty clinicians evaluated 302 challenging, real-world medical cases sourced from published case reports. Each case report was read by two clinicians, who were randomized to one of two assistive conditions: assistance from search engines and standard medical resources; or assistance from AMIE in addition to these tools. All clinicians provided a baseline, unassisted differential diagnosis prior to using the respective assistive tools. AMIE exhibited standalone performance that exceeded that of unassisted clinicians (top-10 accuracy 59.1% versus 33.6%, P = 0.04). Comparing the two assisted study arms, the differential diagnosis quality score was higher for clinicians assisted by AMIE (top-10 accuracy 51.7%) compared with clinicians without its assistance (36.1%; McNemar’s test: 45.7, P View details Triply efficient shadow tomography Robbie King David Gosset Robin Kothari Ryan Babbush PRX Quantum, 6 (2025), pp. 010336 Preview Preview abstract Given copies of a quantum state $\rho$, a shadow tomography protocol aims to learn all expectation values from a fixed set of observables, to within a given precision $\epsilon$. We say that a shadow tomography protocol is \textit{triply efficient} if it is sample- and time-efficient, and only employs measurements that entangle a constant number of copies of $\rho$ at a time. The classical shadows protocol based on random single-copy measurements is triply efficient for the set of local Pauli observables. This and other protocols based on random single-copy Clifford measurements can be understood as arising from fractional colorings of a graph $G$ that encodes the commutation structure of the set of observables. Here we describe a framework for two-copy shadow tomography that uses an initial round of Bell measurements to reduce to a fractional coloring problem in an induced subgraph of $G$ with bounded clique number. This coloring problem can be addressed using techniques from graph theory known as \textit{chi-boundedness}. Using this framework we give the first triply efficient shadow tomography scheme for the set of local fermionic observables, which arise in a broad class of interacting fermionic systems in physics and chemistry. We also give a triply efficient scheme for the set of all $n$-qubit Pauli observables. Our protocols for these tasks use two-copy measurements, which is necessary: sample-efficient schemes are provably impossible using only single-copy measurements. Finally, we give a shadow tomography protocol that compresses an $n$-qubit quantum state into a $\poly(n)$-sized classical representation, from which one can extract the expected value of any of the $4^n$ Pauli observables in $\poly(n)$ time, up to a small constant error. View details Quartic Quantum Speedups for Planted Inference Problems Alexander Schmidhuber Ryan O'Donnell Robin Kothari Ryan Babbush Physical Review X, 15 (2025), pp. 021077 Preview Preview abstract We describe a quantum algorithm for the Planted Noisy kXOR problem (also known as sparse Learning Parity with Noise) that achieves a nearly quartic (4th power) speedup over the best known classical algorithm while also only using logarithmically many qubits. Our work generalizes and simplifies prior work of Hastings, by building on his quantum algorithm for the Tensor Principal Component Analysis (PCA) problem. We achieve our quantum speedup using a general framework based on the Kikuchi Method (recovering the quartic speedup for Tensor PCA), and we anticipate it will yield similar speedups for further planted inference problems. These speedups rely on the fact that planted inference problems naturally instantiate the Guided Sparse Hamiltonian problem. Since the Planted Noisy kXOR problem has been used as a component of certain cryptographic constructions, our work suggests that some of these are susceptible to super-quadratic quantum attacks. View details Security Signals: Making Web Security Posture Measurable At Scale Michele Spagnuolo David Dworken Artur Janc Santiago (Sal) Díaz Lukas Weichselbaum Workshop on Measurements, Attacks, and Defenses for the Web (MADWeb) Preview Preview abstract The area of security measurability is gaining increased attention, with a wide range of organizations calling for the development of scalable approaches for assessing the security of software systems and infrastructure. In this paper, we present our experience developing Security Signals, a comprehensive system providing security measurability for web services, deployed in a complex application ecosystem of thousands of web services handling traffic from billions of users. The system collects security-relevant information from production HTTP traffic at the reverse proxy layer, utilizing novel concepts such as synthetic signals augmented with additional risk information to provide a holistic view of the security posture of individual services and the broader application ecosystem. This approach to measurability has enabled large-scale security improvements to our services, including prioritized rollouts of security enhancements and the implementation of automated regression monitoring. Furthermore, it has proven valuable for security research and prioritization of defensive work. Security Signals addresses shortcomings of prior web measurability proposals by tracking a comprehensive set of security properties relevant to web applications, and by extracting insights from collected data for use by both security experts and non-experts. We believe the lessons learned from the implementation and use of Security Signals offer valuable insights for practitioners responsible for web service security, potentially inspiring new approaches to web security measurability. View details 1 2 3 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
