 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 511 - 525 of 676 publications chip template Remove Improved best-of-both-worlds regret for bandits with delayed feedback Ofir Schlisselberg tal lancewicki Peter Auer Yishay Mansour NeurIPS (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study the multi-armed bandit problem with adversarially chosen delays in the Best-of-Both-Worlds (BoBW) framework, which aims to achieve near-optimal performance in both stochastic and adversarial environments. While prior work has made progress toward this goal, existing algorithms suffer from significant gaps to the known lower bounds, especially in the stochastic settings. Our main contribution is a new algorithm that, up to logarithmic factors, matches the known lower bounds in each setting individually. In the adversarial case, our algorithm achieves regret of $\widetilde{O}(\sqrt{KT} + \sqrt{D})$, which is optimal up to logarithmic terms, where $T$ is the number of rounds, $K$ is the number of arms, and $D$ is the cumulative delay. In the stochastic case, we provide a regret bound which scale as $\sum_{i:\Delta_i>0}\roundy{\logp T/\Delta_i} + \frac{1}{K}\sum \Delta_i \sigma_{max}$, where $\Delta_i$ is the sub-optimality gap of arm $i$ and $\sigma_{\max}$ is the maximum number of missing observations. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first \textit{BoBW} algorithm to simultaneously match the lower bounds in both stochastic and adversarial regimes in delayed environment. Moreover, even beyond the BoBW setting, our stochastic regret bound is the first to match the known lower bound under adversarial delays, improving the second term over the best known result by a factor of $K$. View details Agent-initated interaction in Phone UI Automation Noam Kahlon Guy Rom Tal Efros Filippo Galgani Omri Berkovitch Sapir Caduri Will Bishop Oriana Riva Ido Dagan (2025) Preview Preview abstract Phone automation agents aim to autonomously perform a given natural-language user request, such as scheduling appointments or booking a hotel. While much research effort has been devoted to screen understanding and action planning, complex tasks often necessitate user interaction for successful completion. Aligning the agent with the user's expectations is crucial for building trust and enabling personalized experiences. This requires the agent to proactively engage the user when necessary, avoiding actions that violate their preferences while refraining from unnecessary questions where a default action is expected. We argue that such subtle agent-initiated interaction with the user deserves focused research attention. To promote such research, this paper introduces a task formulation for detecting the need for user interaction and generating appropriate messages. We thoroughly define the task, including aspects like interaction timing and the scope of the agent's autonomy. Using this definition, we derived annotation guidelines and created a diverse dataset for the task, leveraging an existing UI automation dataset. We tested several text-based and multimodal baseline models for the task, finding that it is very challenging for current LLMs. We suggest that our task formulation, dataset, baseline models and analysis will be valuable for future UI automation research, specifically in addressing this crucial yet often overlooked aspect of agent-initiated interaction. This work provides a needed foundation to allow personalized agents to properly engage the user when needed, within the context of phone UI automation. View details Linear-Time User-Level DP SCO via Robust Statistics Pasin Manurangsi Badih Ghazi Daogao Liu Ravi Kumar 2025 Preview Preview abstract User-level differentially private stochastic convex optimization (DP-SCO) has garnered significant attention due to the paramount importance in safeguarding user privacy in large-scale machine learning applications. Current methods, such as those based on Differentially Private Stochastic Gradient Descent (DP-SGD), often struggle with high noise accumulation and suboptimal utility due to the need to privatize every intermediate iterate. In this work, we introduce a novel linear-time algorithm that leverages robust statistics, specifically the geometric median and trimmed mean, to overcome these challenges. Our approach uniquely bounds the sensitivity of all intermediate iterates of SGD with gradient estimation based on robust statistics, thereby significantly reducing the gradient estimation noise and enhancing the privacy-utility trade-off. By sidestepping the repeated privatization required by previous methods, our algorithm not only achieves an improved theoretical privacy-utility balance but also maintains computational efficiency. This work sets the stage for more robust and efficient privacy-preserving techniques in machine learning, with implications for future research and application in the field. View details Non-stochastic Bandits With Evolving Observations Yogev Bar-On Yishay Mansour ALT (2025) Preview Preview abstract We introduce a novel online learning framework that unifies and generalizes pre-established models, such as delayed and corrupted feedback, to encompass adversarial environments where action feedback evolves over time. In this setting, the observed loss is arbitrary and may not correlate with the true loss incurred, with each round updating previous observations adversarially. We propose regret minimization algorithms for both the full-information and bandit settings, with regret bounds quantified by the average feedback accuracy relative to the true loss. Our algorithms match the known regret bounds across many special cases, while also introducing previously unknown bounds. View details Rising Rested MAB with Linear Drift Omer Amichay Yishay Mansour Master's Thesis (2025) Preview Preview abstract We consider non-stationary multi-arm bandit (MAB) where the expected reward of each action follows a linear function of the number of times we executed the action. Our main result is a tight regret bound of $\tilde{\Theta}(T^{4/5}K^{3/5})$, by providing both upper and lower bounds. We extend our results to derive instance dependent regret bounds, which depend on the unknown parametrization of the linear drift of the rewards. View details On the Rational Degree of Boolean Functions and Applications Vishnu Iyer Siddhartha Jain Robin Kothari Matt Kovacs-Deak Vinayak Kumar Luke Schaeffer Daochen Wang Michael Whitmeyer (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study a natural complexity measure of Boolean functions known as the (exact) rational degree. For total functions f, it is conjectured that rdeg (f) is polynomially related to deg (f), where deg (f) is the Fourier degree. Towards this conjecture, we show that symmetric functions have rational degree at least deg (f)/2 and monotone functions have rational degree at least deg(f). We observe that both of these lower bounds are tight. In addition, we show that all read-once depth-d Boolean formulae have rational degree at least Ω( deg (f )^1/d). Furthermore, we show that almost every Boolean function on n variables has rational degree at least n/2 − O(√n). In contrast to total functions, we exhibit partial functions that witness unbounded separations between rational and approximate degree, in both directions. As a consequence, we show that for quantum computers, post-selection and bounded-error are incomparable resources in the black-box model. View details Batch Ensemble for Variance Dependent Regret in Stochastic Bandits Asaf Cassel Orin Levy Yishay Mansour AAAI (2025) Preview Preview abstract Efficiently trading off exploration and exploitation is one of the key challenges in online Reinforcement Learning (RL). Most works achieve this by carefully estimating the model uncertainty and following the so-called optimistic model. Inspired by practical ensemble methods, in this work we propose a simple and novel batch ensemble scheme that provably achieves near-optimal regret for stochastic Multi-Armed Bandits (MAB). Crucially, our algorithm has just a single parameter, namely the number of batches, and its value does not depend on distributional properties such as the scale and variance of the rewards. We complement our theoretical results by demonstrating the effectiveness of our algorithm on synthetic benchmarks. View details CURIE: Evaluating LLMs on multitask long context scientific understanding and reasoning Hao Cui Zahra Shamsi Gowoon Cheon Xuejian Ma Shutong Li Maria Tikhanovskaya Peter Norgaard Nayantara Mudur Martyna Plomecka Paul Raccuglia Yasaman Bahri Victor V. Albert Pranesh Srinivasan Haining Pan Philippe Faist Brian Rohr Ekin Dogus Cubuk Muratahan Aykol Amil Merchant Michael Statt Dan Morris Drew Purves Elise Kleeman Ruth Alcantara Matthew Abraham Muqthar Mohammad Ean Phing VanLee Chenfei Jiang Lizzie Dorfman Eun-Ah Kim Michael Brenner Viren Jain Sameera Ponda Subhashini Venugopalan International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) (2025) Preview Preview abstract The core of the scientific problem-solving process involves synthesizing information while applying expert knowledge. Large Language Models (LLMs) have the potential to accelerate this process due to their extensive knowledge across a variety of domains. Recent advancements have also made it possible for LLMs to handle very long "in-context" content. However, existing evaluations of long-context LLMs have focused on assessing their ability to summarize or retrieve information within the given context, primarily in generalist tasks that do not require deep scientific expertise. To facilitate analogous assessments of domain-specific tasks, we introduce the scientific long-Context Understanding and Reasoning Inference Evaluations (CURIE) benchmark. This benchmark provides a set of 8 challenging tasks, derived from around 250 scientific research papers, requiring domain expertise, comprehension of long in-context information, and multi-step reasoning that tests the ability of LLMs to assist scientists in realistic workflows. Tasks in CURIE have been collected from experts in six disciplines - materials science, theoretical condensed matter physics, quantum computing, geospatial analysis, biodiversity, and protein sequencing - covering both experimental and theoretical workflows in science. We evaluate a range of closed and open LLMs on these tasks. Additionally, we propose strategies for task decomposition, which allow for a more nuanced evaluation of the models and facilitate staged multi-step assessments. We hope that insights gained from CURIE can guide the future development of LLMs. View details Diversify and Conquer: Diversity-Centric Data Selection with Iterative Refinement Simon Chi Lok Yu Liangyu Chen Marzieh Fadaee Sara Ahmadian 2025 Preview Preview abstract Finetuning large language models on instruction data is an important step in enriching the knowledge learned during pre-training and improving instruction-following capabilities. As the number of instruction datasets continues to grow, selecting the right data to achieve optimal results becomes increasingly important. In this work, we ask a prominent question: How can we determine the optimal subset of data for effective training? While much of the existing research primarily emphasizes local criteria, such as instance quality, for subset selection, we argue that a global approach focused on data diversity is more critical. Our approach utilizes -means clustering to ensure that the selected subset effectively represents the full dataset. We propose an iterative refinement method inspired by active learning techniques to resample instances from clusters, with the importance and sampling weight of each cluster being reassessed in every training iteration. This method allows us to reduce the effect of outliers and automatically filter out clusters containing low-quality data. Through extensive evaluation across natural language reasoning, general world knowledge, code and math reasoning tasks, and by fine-tuning models from various families, we observe consistent improvements, achieving a 7% increase over the random selection and a 3.8% improvement over state-of-the-art sampling methods. Our work highlights the significance of diversity-first sampling when finetuning LLMs to enhance performance across a broad array of evaluation tasks. Our code is submitted as supplementary materials. View details Faster MPC algorithms for approximate allocation in uniformly sparse graphs Wen-Horng Sheu Srikkanth Ramachandran Slobodan Mitrovic Jakub Łącki SPAA'25 (2025) Preview Preview abstract We study the allocation problem in the Massively Parallel Computation (MPC) model. This problem is a special case of b-matching in which the input is a bipartite graph with capacities greater than 1 in only one part of the bipartition. We give a (1 + ϵ) approximate algorithm for the problem, which runs in Õ(√log λ) MPC rounds, using sublinear space per machine and Õ(λn) total space, where λ is the arboricity of the input graph. Our result is obtained by providing a new analysis of a LOCAL algorithm by Agrawal, Zadimoghaddam, and Mirrokni [ICML 2018], which improves its round complexity from O(log n) to O(log λ). Prior to our work, no o(log n) round algorithm for constant-approximate allocation was known in either LOCAL or sublinear space MPC models for graphs with low arboricity. View details Asking Clarifying Questions for Preference Elicitation with Large Language Models Ali Montazer Guy Tennenholtz Craig Boutilier Ofer Meshi (2025) Preview Preview abstract Large Language Models (LLMs) have made it possible for recommendation systems to interact with users in open-ended conversational interfaces. In order to personalize LLM responses, it is crucial to elicit user preferences, especially when there is limited user history. One way to get more information is to present clarifying questions to the user. However, generating effective sequential clarifying questions across various domains remains a challenge, as even advanced LLMs still struggle with this task. To address this, we introduce a novel approach for training LLMs to ask sequential questions that reveal user preferences. Our method follows a two-stage process inspired by diffusion models: starting from a user profile, in a forward process we generate clarifying questions, obtain answers, and then remove the corresponding information from the user profile, which is analogous to adding noise to the user profile. In the reverse process, zour model learns to “denoise” the user profile by learning to ask effective clarifying questions. Our results show that our method significantly boosts the LLM’s proficiency in asking funnel questions and elicit user preferences effectively. View details Is API Access to LLMs Useful for Generating Private Synthetic Tabular Data? Marika Swanberg Edo Roth Peter Kairouz Ryan McKenna Albert Cheu (2025) Preview Preview abstract Differentially private (DP) synthetic data is a versatile tool for enabling the analysis of private data. Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have inspired a number of algorithm techniques for improving DP synthetic data generation. One family of approaches uses DP finetuning on the foundation model weights; however, the model weights for state-of-the-art models may not be public. In this work we propose two DP synthetic tabular data algorithms that only require API access to the foundation model. We adapt the Private Evolution algorithm (Lin et al., 2023; Xie et al., 2024) -- which was designed for image and text data -- to the tabular data domain. In our extension of Private Evolution, we define a query workload-based distance measure, which may be of independent interest. We propose a family of algorithms that use one-shot API access to LLMs, rather than adaptive queries to the LLM. Our findings reveal that API-access to powerful LLMs does not always improve the quality of DP synthetic data compared to established baselines that operate without such access. We provide insights into the underlying reasons and propose improvements to LLMs that could make them more effective for this application. View details Keep Guessing? When Considering Inference Scaling, Mind the Baselines Gal Yona Or Honovich Omer Levy Roee Aharoni NAACL Findings 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Recent work suggested utilizing inference compute, showing that scaling of number of samples consistently improves the fractions of problems solved by any attempt, namely the coverage. In this work, we suggest that inference scaling gains should be compared with proper baselines, as some datasets become degenerate when allowing a large number of attempts. We focus on two domains - mathematical reasoning and factual knowledge, showing that for the MATH and Entity Questions datasets, informed answer enumeration obtains similar or even better results than repeated model sampling, with a much lower sample budget. While we believe that inference scaling is a promising approach for unlocking the potential of language models, we recommend carefully selecting models and datasets when applying this method. Otherwise, the results of inference scaling should be interpreted with caution. View details Synthesizing 3D Abstractions by Inverting Procedural Buildings with Transformers Max Dax Jordi Serrano Berbel Jan Stria Leonidas Guibas Urs Bergmann 2025 Preview Preview abstract We generate abstractions of buildings, reflecting the essential aspects of their geometry and structure, by learning to invert procedural models. We first build a dataset of abstract procedural building models paired with simulated point clouds and then learn the inverse mapping through a transformer. Given a point cloud, the trained transformer then infers the corresponding abstracted building in terms of a programmatic language description. This approach leverages expressive procedural models developed for gaming and animation, and thereby retains desirable properties such as efficient rendering of the inferred abstractions and strong priors for regularity and symmetry. Our approach achieves good reconstruction accuracy in terms of geometry and structure, as well as structurally consistent inpainting. View details EditInspector: A Benchmark for Evaluation of Text-Guided Image Edits Moran Yanuka Ron Yosef Dani Lischinski Yonatan Bitton 2025 Preview Preview abstract Text-guided image editing, fueled by recent advancements in generative AI, is becoming increasingly widespread. This trend highlights the need for a comprehensive framework to verify text-guided edits and assess their quality. To address this need, we introduce EditInspector, a novel benchmark for evaluation of text-guided image edits, based on human annotations collected using an extensive template for edit verification. We leverage EditInspector to evaluate the performance of state-of-the-art (SoTA) vision and language models in assessing edits across various dimensions, including accuracy, artifact detection, visual quality, seamless integration with the image scene, adherence to common sense, and the ability to describe edit-induced changes. Our findings indicate that current models struggle to evaluate edits comprehensively and frequently hallucinate when describing the changes. To address these challenges, we propose two novel methods that outperform SoTA models in both artifact detection and difference caption generation. View details 35 36 37 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
