 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 571 - 585 of 676 publications chip template Remove Analysing Futex-based Synchronisation Primitives Using Model Checking Hugues Evrard Alastair F. Donaldson International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer (2025) Preview Preview abstract The futex Linux system call enables implement- ing performant inter-thread and inter-process synchronisa- tion primitives, such as mutexes and condition variables. However, the futex system call is notoriously difficult to use correctly. An early implementation of futex-based mutexes in the Linux Native POSIX Thread Library suffered from a subtle defect. When teaching about clever futex-based mu- tex designs that avoid these early shortcomings, we have found that their intricacies are hard to understand and dif- ficult to convey to students. In this case study, we use the Promela modelling language to model a number of futex- based mutex and condition variable implementations, and the Spin model checker to verify safety properties over these models. We show that model checking is effective at con- firming known bugs that affected real-world implementa- tions, and confirming that current implementations do in- deed behave correctly in multi-threaded environments. The Promela models we have developed are available as open source, and may be useful as teaching material for classes that cover futex-based synchronisation primitives, and as a template for performing formal verification on new synchro- nisation primitive designs. View details Accurate somatic small variant discovery for multiple sequencing technologies with DeepSomatic Jimin Park Daniel E. Cook Pi-Chuan Chang Alexey Kolesnikov Lucas Brambrink Juan Carlos Mier Joshua Gardner Brandy McNulty Samuel Sacco Ayse G. Keskus Asher Bryant Tanveer Ahmad Jyoti Shetty Yongmei Zhao Bao Tran Giuseppe Narzisi Adrienne Helland Byunggil Yoo Irina Pushel Lisa A. Lansdon Chengpeng Bi Adam Walter Margaret Gibson Tomi Pastinen Rebecca Reiman Sharvari Mankame T. Rhyker Ranallo-Benavidez Christine Brown Nicolas Robine Floris P. Barthel Midhat S. Farooqi Karen H. Miga Andrew Carroll Mikhail Kolmogorov Benedict Paten Kishwar Shafin Nature Biotechnology (2025) Preview Preview abstract Somatic variant detection is an integral part of cancer genomics analysis. While most methods have focused on short-read sequencing, long-read technologies offer potential advantages in repeat mapping and variant phasing. We present DeepSomatic, a deep-learning method for detecting somatic small nucleotide variations and insertions and deletions from both short-read and long-read data. The method has modes for whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing and can run on tumor–normal, tumor-only and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples. To train DeepSomatic and help address the dearth of publicly available training and benchmarking data for somatic variant detection, we generated and make openly available the Cancer Standards Long-read Evaluation (CASTLE) dataset of six matched tumor–normal cell line pairs whole-genome sequenced with Illumina, PacBio HiFi and Oxford Nanopore Technologies, along with benchmark variant sets. Across samples, both cell line and patient-derived, and across short-read and long-read sequencing technologies, DeepSomatic consistently outperforms existing callers. View details Confinement in a Z2 lattice gauge theory on a quantum computer Julius Mildenberger Zhang Jiang Wojtek Mruczkiewicz Jad C. Halimeh Philipp Hauke Nature Physics (2025) Preview Preview abstract Gauge theories describe the fundamental forces in the standard model of particle physics and play an important role in condensed-matter physics. The constituents of gauge theories, for example, charged matter and electric gauge field, are governed by local gauge constraints, which lead to key phenomena such as the confinement of particles that are not fully understood. In this context, quantum simulators may address questions that are challenging for classical methods. Although engineering gauge constraints is highly demanding, recent advances in quantum computing are beginning to enable digital quantum simulations of gauge theories. Here we simulate confinement dynamics in a Z2 lattice gauge theory on a superconducting quantum processor. Tuning a term that couples only to the electric field produces confinement of charges, a manifestation of the tight bond that the gauge constraint generates between both. Moreover, we show how a modification of the gauge constraint from Z2 towards U(1) symmetry freezes the system dynamics. Our work illustrates the restriction that the underlying gauge constraint imposes on the dynamics of a lattice gauge theory, showcases how gauge constraints can be modified and protected, and promotes the study of other models governed by multibody interactions. View details A Remote Sensing Vision-Language Foundation Model for Zero-Shot Tasks Aviad Barzilai Genady Beryozkin Amr Helmy Yotam Gigi George Leifman Vered Silverman Yehonathan Refael Tomer Shekel 2025 Preview Preview abstract Foundation models have revolutionized AI, particularly in visual-language tasks, achieving unparalleled performance across domains. Despite advancements, remote sensing (RS) remains underserved due to the lack of large-scale image-text datasets. This paper addresses the gap by introducing two novel datasets: RS-WebLI and Google Maps, specifically designed for training remote sensing vision-language models (RS-VLMs). The RS-WebLI dataset leverages web images filtered for RS relevance, enriched with high-quality captions derived from associated alt-text. The Google Maps dataset utilizes Gemini, a multi-modal large language model, to generate accurate and descriptive captions by aligning Google Maps data with high-resolution satellite and aerial imagery. These datasets together encompass a vast and diverse array of remote sensing objects and contexts, forming a robust foundation for RS-specific tasks. The two datasets together incorporate around 20M image and text pairs. We fine-tuned Mammut, a state-of-the-art (SOTA) vision-language model, using these datasets. The model employs a contrastive learning framework, enabling robust zero-shot capabilities. Moreover, the Mammut architecture incorporates a generative loss component, further enhancing its adaptability. To evaluate the model’s zero-shot performance, we used two main methods. The first, zero-shot classification, tests the ability of the model to classify a remote sensing image into a pre-defined set of classes without training directly on the dataset. For this task we use the following RS image classification datasets: Functional Map of the World (FMOW), RESISC45, UCM Classification and SkyScript classification. For every dataset, we composed a set of sentences of the form ”An aerial image of class name”, and we used a simple nearest neighbor algorithm to find the best matching class for every image. The metric is the top-1 accuracy. The second evaluation method is zero-shot retrieval. For that task, we use the following remote sensing image-captions datasets: NWPU RESISC, UCM Captions, RSITMD and RSICD. Similarly to zero-shot classification, we use nearest neighbors on the model’s output embedding to match every image to a class. Similarly to other works in the field, we present the average of the top-1, top-5 and top-10 recall scores. The study also evaluates supervised learning regimes, where the VLMs are fine-tuned on task-specific datasets like FMOW and FloodNet. These models outperform traditional masked-image models, showcasing the advantage of leveraging vision-language pre-training for RS applications. To assess generalization, the Google Maps Hold-out dataset was introduced, excluding specific object types during training. Results indicate the model's strong ability to recognize unseen objects, validating its versatility. This work establishes a comprehensive framework for developing RS-VLMs, addressing dataset limitations and model scalability. It sets a precedent for leveraging foundation models in RS, paving the way for enhanced zero-shot and fine-tuned applications in remote sensing analytics. Future directions include expanding dataset diversity and exploring advanced architectures to further push the boundaries of RS vision-language understanding. View details Synthesize Privacy-Preserving High-Resolution Images via Private Text Mediators Haoxiang Wang Zinan Lin Da Yu Huishuai Zhang 2025 Preview Preview abstract A new framework for generating high-resolution, differentially private (DP) synthetic images. The method summarizes each private image using image-to-text models, applies a modified Private Evolution algorithm to generate DP text, and then reconstructs images via text-to-image models. View details Dynamic Threats to Credible Auctions Martino Banchio Andrzej Skrzypacz Frank Yang Proceedings of the 26th ACM Conference on Economics and Computation (2025) Preview Preview abstract A seller wants to sell an item to a set of bidders using a credible mechanism. We show that when the seller has private information about her cost, it is not possible to implement the optimal mechanism using a static mechanism. As we show, even the optimal first-price auction is no longer credible. We show that optimality requires a dynamic mechanism and that the English auction can be used to credibly implement the optimal mechanism. In contrast, we show that the Dutch auction may not be credible. We characterize all symmetric static auctions that are credible: They are first-price auctions that depend on the seller’s cost in a minimal way via a secret reserve and may profitably involve pooling of bidders via a bid restriction. View details Streaming Trends: A Low-Latency Platform for Dynamic Video Grouping and Trending Corpora Building Nikos Parotsidis CJ Carey Scott Wang Caroline Zhou Ashkan Norouzi Fard Yang Gu Yongzhe Wang Yaping Zhang Li Zhang Mingyan Gao Qiao Zhang Sourabh Bansod 2025 Preview Preview abstract This paper presents Streaming Trends, a real-time system deployed on a short-form videos platform that enables dynamic content grouping, tracking videos from upload to their identification as part of a trend. Addressing the latency inherent in traditional batch processing for short-form video, Streaming Trends utilizes online clustering and flexible similarity measures to associate new uploads with relevant groups in near real-time. The system combines online processing for immediate updates triggered by uploads and seed queries with offline processes for similarity modeling and cluster quality maintenance. By facilitating the rapid identification and association of trending videos, Streaming Trends significantly enhances content discovery and user engagement on the YouTube Shorts platform. View details MUSE: Machine Unlearning Six-Way Evaluation for Language Models Weijia Shi Jaechan Lee Yangsibo Huang Sadhika Malladi Jieyu Zhao Ari Holtzman Daogao Liu Luke Zettlemoyer Noah Smith Chiyuan Zhang International Conference on Learning Representations (2025) Preview Preview abstract Language models (LMs) are trained on vast amounts of text data, which may include private and copyrighted content. Data owners may request the removal of their data from a trained model due to privacy or copyright concerns. However, exactly unlearning only these datapoints (i.e., retraining with the data removed) is intractable in modern-day models. This has led to the development of many approximate unlearning algorithms. The evaluation of the efficacy of these algorithms has traditionally been narrow in scope, failing to precisely quantify the success and practicality of the algorithm from the perspectives of both the model deployers and the data owners. We address this issue by proposing MUSE, a comprehensive machine unlearning evaluation benchmark that enumerates six diverse desirable properties for unlearned models: (1) no verbatim memorization, (2) no knowledge memorization, (3) no privacy leakage, (4) utility preservation on data not intended for removal, (5) scalability with respect to the size of removal requests, and (6) sustainability over sequential unlearning requests. Using these criteria, we benchmark how effectively eight popular unlearning algorithms on 7B-parameter LMs can unlearn Harry Potter books and news articles. Our results demonstrate that most algorithms can prevent verbatim memorization and knowledge memorization to varying degrees, but only one algorithm does not lead to severe privacy leakage. Furthermore, existing algorithms fail to meet deployer's expectations because they often degrade general model utility and also cannot sustainably accommodate successive unlearning requests or large-scale content removal. Our findings identify key issues with the practicality of existing unlearning algorithms on language models, and we release our benchmark to facilitate further evaluations: http://muse-bench.github.io/ View details "The Conduit by which Change Happens": Processes, Barriers, and Support for Interpersonal Learning about Responsible AI Jaemarie Solyst Lauren Wilcox Michael Madaio 2025 Preview Preview abstract Responsible AI (RAI) practices are increasingly important for practitioners in anticipating and addressing potential harms of AI, and emerging research suggests that AI practitioners often learn about RAI on-the-job. More generally, learning at work is social; thus, this work explores the interpersonal aspects of learning about RAI on-the-job. Through workshops with 21 industry-based RAI educators, we offer the first empirical investigation into interpersonal processes and dimensions of learning about RAI at work. This study finds key phases of RAI are sites for ongoing interpersonal learning, such as critical reflection about potential RAI impacts and collective sense-making about operationalizing RAI principles. We uncover a significant gap between these interpersonal learning processes and current approaches to learning about RAI. Finally, we identify barriers and supports for interpersonal learning about RAI. We close by discussing opportunities to better enable interpersonal learning about RAI on-the-job and the broader implications of interpersonal learning for RAI. View details Responsible AI measures dataset for ethics evaluation of AI systems Shalaleh Rismani Leah Davis Bonam Mingole Negar Rostamzadeh Renee Shelby AJung Moon Scientific Data (2025) Preview Preview abstract Meaningful governance of any system requires the system to be assessed and monitored effectively. In the domain of Artificial Intelligence (AI), global efforts have established a set of ethical principles, including fairness, transparency, and privacy upon which AI governance expectations are being built. The computing research community has proposed numerous means of measuring an AI system’s normative qualities along these principles. Current reporting of these measures is principle-specific, limited in scope, or otherwise dispersed across publication platforms, hindering the domain’s ability to critique its practices. To address this, we introduce the Responsible AI Measures Dataset, consolidating 12,067 data points across 791 evaluation measures covering 11 ethical principles. It is extracted from a corpus of computing literature (n = 257) published between 2011 and 2023. The dataset includes detailed descriptions of each measure, AI system characteristics, and publication metadata. An accompanying, interactive visualization tool supports usability and interpretation of the dataset. The Responsible AI Measures Dataset enables practitioners to explore existing assessment approaches and critically analyze how the computing domain measures normative concepts. View details Analysing Futex-based Synchronisation Primitives Using Model Checking Hugues Evrard Alastair F. Donaldson International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer (STTT) (2025) Preview Preview abstract The futex Linux system call enables implement- ing performant inter-thread and inter-process synchronisa- tion primitives, such as mutexes and condition variables. However, the futex system call is notoriously difficult to use correctly. An early implementation of futex-based mutexes in the Linux Native POSIX Thread Library suffered from a subtle defect. When teaching about clever futex-based mu- tex designs that avoid these early shortcomings, we have found that their intricacies are hard to understand and dif- ficult to convey to students. In this case study, we use the Promela modelling language to model a number of futex- based mutex and condition variable implementations, and the Spin model checker to verify safety properties over these models. We show that model checking is effective at con- firming known bugs that affected real-world implementa- tions, and confirming that current implementations do in- deed behave correctly in multi-threaded environments. The Promela models we have developed are available as open source, and may be useful as teaching material for classes that cover futex-based synchronisation primitives, and as a template for performing formal verification on new synchro- nisation primitive designs. View details Test of Time: Benchmarking LLMs on Temporal Reasoning John Palowitch Jonathan Halcrow Anton Tsitsulin Bryan Perozzi Mehran Kazemi Karishma Malkan Sungyong Seo Jinyeong Yim Bahar Fatemi 2025 Preview Preview abstract Large language models (LLMs) have showcased remarkable reasoning capabilities, yet they remain susceptible to errors, particularly in temporal reasoning tasks involving complex temporal logic. Existing research has explored LLM performance on temporal reasoning using diverse datasets and benchmarks. However, these studies often rely on real-world data that LLMs may have encountered during pre-training or employ anonymization techniques that can inadvertently introduce factual inconsistencies. In this work, we address these limitations by introducing novel synthetic and real-world datasets specifically designed to assess LLM temporal reasoning abilities in various scenarios. We automatically generate a wide range of questions across these datasets, enabling systematic investigation into the impact of graph structure, size, question type, fact order, and other factors on LLM performance. Our findings provide valuable insights into the strengths and weaknesses of current LLMs in temporal reasoning tasks. To foster further research in this area, we are open-sourcing the datasets and evaluation framework used in our experiments. View details Score-based Causal Representation Learning: Linear and General Transformations Abhishek Kumar Emre Acarturk Karthikeyan Shanmugam Ali Tajer Burak Varici (JMLR) Journal of Machine Learning Research 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper addresses intervention-based causal representation learning (CRL) under a general nonparametric latent causal model and an unknown transformation that maps the latent variables to the observed variables. Linear and general transformations are investigated. The paper addresses both the identifiability and achievability aspects. Identifiability refers to determining algorithm-agnostic conditions that ensure the recovery of the true latent causal variables and the underlying latent causal graph. Achievability refers to the algorithmic aspects and addresses designing algorithms that achieve identifiability guarantees. By drawing novel connections between score functions (i.e., the gradients of the logarithm of density functions) and CRL, this paper designs a score-based class of algorithms that ensures both identifiability and achievability. First, the paper focuses on linear transformations and shows that one stochastic hard intervention per node suffices to guarantee identifiability. It also provides partial identifiability guarantees for soft interventions, including identifiability up to mixing with parents for general causal models and perfect recovery of the latent graph for sufficiently nonlinear causal models. Secondly, it focuses on general transformations and demonstrates that two stochastic hard interventions per node are sufficient for identifiability. This is achieved by defining a differentiable loss function whose global optima ensure identifiability for general CRL. Notably, one does not need to know which pair of interventional environments has the same node intervened. Finally, the theoretical results are empirically validated via experiments on structured synthetic data and image data. View details Accurate somatic small variant discovery for multiple sequencing technologies with DeepSomatic Jimin Park Daniel Cook Pi-Chuan Chang Alexey Kolesnikov Lucas Brambrink Juan Carlos Mier Joshua Gardner Brandy McNulty Samuel Sacco Ayse Keskus Asher Bryant Tanveer Ahmad Jyoti Shetty Yongmei Zhao Bao Tran Giuseppe Narzisi Adrienne Helland Byunggil Yoo Irina Pushel Lisa Lansdon Chengpeng Bi Adam Walter Margaret Gibson Tomi Pastinen Rebecca Reiman Sharvari Mankame Rhyker Ranallo-Benavidez Christine Brown Nicolas Robine Floris Barthel Midhat S. Farooqi Karen Miga Andrew Carroll Mikhail Kolmogorov Benedict Paten Kishwar Shafin Nature Biotechnology (2025) Preview Preview abstract Somatic variant detection is an integral part of cancer genomics analysis. While most methods have focused on short-read sequencing, long-read technologies offer potential advantages in repeat mapping and variant phasing. We present DeepSomatic, a deep-learning method for detecting somatic small nucleotide variations and insertions and deletions from both short-read and long-read data. The method has modes for whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing and can run on tumor–normal, tumor-only and formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples. To train DeepSomatic and help address the dearth of publicly available training and benchmarking data for somatic variant detection, we generated and make openly available the Cancer Standards Long-read Evaluation (CASTLE) dataset of six matched tumor–normal cell line pairs whole-genome sequenced with Illumina, PacBio HiFi and Oxford Nanopore Technologies, along with benchmark variant sets. Across samples, both cell line and patient-derived, and across short-read and long-read sequencing technologies, DeepSomatic consistently outperforms existing callers. View details GIST: Greedy Independent Set Thresholding for Max-Min Diversification with Submodular Utility Matthew Fahrbach Srikumar Ramalingam Morteza Zadimoghaddam Sara Ahmadian Gui Citovsky Giulia DeSalvo Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) Preview Preview abstract We introduce a novel subset selection problem called \emph{min-distance diversification with monotone submodular utility} (MDMS), which has a wide variety of applications in machine learning, e.g., data sampling and feature selection. Given a set of points in a metric space, the goal of MDMS is to maximize an objective function combining a monotone submodular utility term and a min-distance diversity term between any pair of selected points, subject to a cardinality constraint. We propose the $\GIST$ algorithm, which achieves a $\sfrac{1}{2}$-approximation guarantee for MDMS by approximating a series of maximum independent set problems with a bicriteria greedy algorithm. We also prove that it is NP-hard to approximate to within a factor of $0.5584$. Finally, we demonstrate that $\GIST$ outperforms existing benchmarks for on a real-world image classification task that studies single-shot subset selection for ImageNet. View details 39 40 41 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
