 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 301 - 315 of 676 publications chip template Remove Algebraic Geometry Codes and Decoded Quantum Interferometry Stephen Jordan Andi Gu (2025) Preview Preview abstract Decoded Quantum Interferometry (DQI) defines a duality that pairs optimization problems with optimization problems. The original work on DQI considered Reed- Solomon decoding, whose dual optimization problem, called Optimal Polynomial In- tersection (OPI), is a polynomial regression problem over a finite field. Here, we consider a class of algebraic geometry codes called Hermitian codes. We show that the dual optimization problem, which we call Hermitian Optimal Polynomial Intersection (HOPI), is a polynomial regression problem over a Hermitian curve. Because the dual to a Hermitian code is another Hermitian code, the HOPI problem can also be viewed as approximate list recovery for Hermitian codes. By comparing to Prange’s algorithm, simulated annealing, and algebraic list recovery algorithms, we find a large parameter regime in which DQI efficiently achieves a better approximation than these classical algorithms. Our findings suggest that the apparent quantum speedup offered by DQI on the OPI problem may be a special case of a broader quantum speedup for a more general class of problems regarding polynomial regression on algebraic varieties. View details Learning without training: The implicit dynamics of in-context learning Benoit Dherin Michael Munn Hanna Mazzawi Michael Wunder Xavi Gonzalvo arXiv (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract One of the most striking features of Large Language Models (LLMs) is their ability to learn in-context. Namely at inference time an LLM is able to learn new patterns without any additional weight update when these patterns are presented in the form of examples in the prompt, even if these patterns were not seen during training. The mechanisms through which this can happen are still largely unknown. In this work, we show that the stacking of a self-attention layer with an MLP, allows the transformer block to implicitly modify the weights of the MLP layer according to the context. We argue through theory and experimentation that this simple mechanism may be the reason why LLMs can learn in-context and not only during training. Specifically, we show how a transformer block implicitly transforms a context into a low-rank weight-update of its MLP layer. View details Scalable contribution bounding to achieve privacy Morteza Zadimoghaddam Jason Lee Alessandro Epasto Vincent Cohen-Addad 2025 Preview Preview abstract In modern datasets, where single records can have multiple owners, enforcing user-level differential privacy requires capping each user's total contribution. This "contribution bounding" becomes a significant combinatorial challenge. Existing sequential algorithms for this task are computationally intensive and do not scale to the massive datasets prevalent today. To address this scalability bottleneck, we propose a novel and efficient distributed algorithm. Our approach models the complex ownership structure as a hypergraph, where users are vertices and records are hyperedges. The algorithm proceeds in rounds, allowing users to propose records in parallel. A record is added to the final dataset only if all its owners unanimously agree, thereby ensuring that no user's predefined contribution limit is violated. This method aims to maximize the size of the resulting dataset for high utility while providing a practical, scalable solution for implementing user-level privacy in large, real-world systems. View details Using Magnesium Hydroxide for Ocean Alkalinity Enhancement: Elucidating the Role of Formation Conditions on Material Properties and Dissolution Kinetics Mike Tyka Frontiers in Climate (2025) Preview Preview abstract Mg(OH)2 holds potential as an alkalinity source for Ocean Alkalinity Enhancement (OAE). It is a current byproduct of desalination treatment through the alkalinity exchange of electrochemically derived NaOH to the Mg-rich reverse osmosis reject brine. Characterization found no chemical composition difference among seawater-precipitated and industrial sourced Mg(OH)2 with both having high (>98%) purity. Differences were found with the crystallinity with industrial sources containing a higher degree of crystallinity of 0.83-0.85 compared to 0.16-0.33 for seawater-precipitated paste. Mg(OH)2 with a higher degree of crystallinity (>80%) had significantly slower dissolution rates than Mg(OH)2 with a lower degree of crystallinity ( View details Synthesizing and Adapting Error Correction Data for Mobile Large Language Model Applications Yanxiang Zhang Zheng Xu Shanshan Wu Yuanbo Zhang Daniel Ramage Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 6: Industry Track) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Error correction is an important capability when applying large language models (LLMs) to facilitate user typing on mobile devices. In this paper, we use LLMs to synthesize a high-quality dataset of error correction pairs to evaluate and improve LLMs for mobile applications. We first prompt LLMs with error correction domain knowledge to build a scalable and reliable addition to the existing data synthesis pipeline. We then adapt the synthetic data distribution to match the mobile application domain by reweighting the samples. The reweighting model is learnt by predicting (a handful of) live A/B test metrics when deploying LLMs in production, given the LLM performance on offline evaluation data and scores from a small privacy-preserving on-device language model. Finally, we present best practices for mixing our synthetic data with other data sources to improve model performance on error correction in both offline evaluation and production live A/B testing. View details Linear-Time Multilevel Graph Partitioning via Edge Sparsification Peter Sanders Dominik Rosch Nikolai Maas Lars Gottesbüren Daniel Seemaier 2025 Preview Preview abstract The current landscape of balanced graph partitioning is divided into high-quality but expensive multilevel algorithms and cheaper approaches with linear running time, such as single-level algorithms and streaming algorithms. We demonstrate how to achieve the best of both worlds with a linear time multilevel algorithm. Multilevel algorithms construct a hierarchy of increasingly smaller graphs by repeatedly contracting clusters of nodes. Our approach preserves their distinct advantage, allowing refinement of the partition over multiple levels with increasing detail. At the same time, we use edge sparsification to guarantee geometric size reduction between the levels and thus linear running time. We provide a proof of the linear running time as well as additional insights into the behavior of multilevel algorithms, showing that graphs with low modularity are most likely to trigger worst-case running time. We evaluate multiple approaches for edge sparsification and integrate our algorithm into the state-of-the-art multilevel partitioner KaMinPar, maintaining its excellent parallel scalability. As demonstrated in detailed experiments, this results in a 1.49x average speedup (up to 4x for some instances) with only 1% loss in solution quality. Moreover, our algorithm clearly outperforms state-of-the-art single-level and streaming approaches. View details Tesseract: A Search-Based Decoder for Quantum Error Correction Laleh Beni Oscar Higgott Noah Shutty 2025 Preview Preview abstract Tesseract is a Most-Likely-Error decoder designed for quantum error-correcting codes. Tesseract conducts a search through an graph on the set of all subsets of errors to find the lowest cost subset of errors consistent with the input syndrome. Although this set is exponentially large, the search can be made efficient in practice for random errors using A* along with a variety of pruning heuristics. We show through benchmark circuits for surface, color, and bivariate-bicycle codes that Tesseract is competitive with integer programming-based decoders at moderate physical error rates. Finally, we compare surface and bivariate bicycle codes using most-likely error decoding View details Deterministic Parallel High-Quality Hypergraph Partitioning Nikolai Maas Lars Gottesbüren Robert Krause 2025 Preview Preview abstract We present a deterministic parallel multilevel algorithm for balanced hypergraph partitioning that matches the state of the art for non-deterministic algorithms. Deterministic parallel algorithms produce the same result in each invocation, which is crucial for reproducibility. Moreover, determinism is highly desirable in application areas such as VLSI design. While there has been tremendous progress in parallel hypergraph partitioning algorithms recently, deterministic counterparts for high-quality local search techniques are missing. Consequently, solution quality is severely lacking in comparison to the non-deterministic algorithms. In this work we close this gap. First, we present a generalization of the recently proposed Jet refinement algorithm. While Jet is naturally amenable to determinism, significant changes are necessary to achieve competitive performance on hypergraphs. We also propose an improved deterministic rebalancing algorithm for Jet. Moreover, we consider the powerful but slower flow-based refinement and introduce a scheme that enables deterministic results while building upon a non-deterministic maximum flow algorithm. As demonstrated in our thorough experimental evaluation, this results in the first deterministic parallel partitioner that is competitive to the highest quality solvers. With Jet refinement, we match or exceed the quality of Mt-KaHyPar's non-deterministic default configuration while being only 15% slower on average. We observe self-relative speedups of up to 55 on 64 cores with a 22.5x average speedup. Our deterministic flow-based refinement exceeds the quality of the non-deterministic variant by roughly 1% on average but requires 31% more running time. View details Smartwatch-Based Walking Metrics Estimation Amir Farjadian Anupam Pathak Alicia Kokoszka Jonathan Hsu Kyle DeHolton Lawrence Cai Shwetak Patel Ming-Zher Poh Mark Malhotra Jonathan Wang Shun Liao 2025 Preview Preview abstract Gait parameters are important health indicators of neurological control, musculoskeletal health and fall risk, but traditional analysis requires specialized laboratory equipment. While smartphone inertial measurement units (IMUs) enable estimation of gait metrics, their real-world use may be limited by inconsistent placement and user burden. With a fixed on-wrist placement, smartwatches offer a stable, convenient and continuous monitoring potential, but wrist-based sensing presents inherent challenges due to the indirect coupling between arm swing and leg movement. This paper introduces a novel multi-head deep learning model leveraging IMU signals from a consumer smartwatch, along with user height information to estimate a comprehensive suite of spatio-temporal walking metrics, including step length , gait speed, swing time, stance time, and double support time. Results from 250 participants across two countries demonstrate that the model achieves high validity (Pearson r > 0.7) and reliability (ICC > 0.7) for most gait metrics, comparable or exceeding leading smartphone-based approaches. This work, the largest in-lab, smartwatch-based gait study to date, highlights the feasibility of gait monitoring using ubiquitous consumer smartwatches. View details The Role of Outgoing Connection Heterogeneity in Feedforward Layers of Large Language Models Felix Stahlberg Shankar Kumar Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, Association for Computational Linguistics, Suzhou, China (to appear) Preview Preview abstract We report on investigations into the characteristics of outgoing connections in feedforward layers of large language models. Our findings show that inner neurons with diverse outgoing connection strengths contribute more significantly to model performance than those with uniform connections. We propose a new fine-tuning loss that takes advantage of this observation by decreasing the outgoing connection entropy in feedforward layers. Using this loss yields gains over standard fine-tuning across two different model families (PaLM-2 and Gemma-2) for downstream tasks in math, coding, and language understanding. To further elucidate the role of outgoing connection heterogeneity, we develop a data-free structured pruning method, which uses entropy to identify and remove neurons. This method significantly surpasses the effectiveness of random and even magnitude-based pruning. View details Ethical Co-Development of AI Applications with Indigenous Communities Claudio Pinhanez Edem Wornyo (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract This course explores how researchers and practitioners can engage ethically with Indigenous communities when developing AI- and data-intensive applications. Some key issues such as fair engagement, legal constraints, reciprocity, and informed consent are discussed based on the examples drawn from the instructors’ experience. The course also examines good practices in terms of co-designing and co-development processes, data governance and sovereignty issues and systems, decolonial software licensing, and processes of technology transfer and appropriation. In its practical part, the course critically discusses examples and cases gathered from the audience to explore the diversity of issues and solutions when working with Indigenous communities. View details Improving Informally Romanized Language Identification Adrian Benton Alexander Gutkin Christo Kirov Brian Roark Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), Association for Computational Linguistics, Suzhou, China, 2318–2336 Preview Preview abstract The Latin script is often used informally to write languages with non-Latin native scripts. In many cases (e.g., most languages in India), there is no orthography, meaning that there is no conventional spelling of words in the Latin script, hence there will be high spelling variability in written text. Such romanization can render languages that are normally easily distinguished based on script highly confusable, such as Hindi and Urdu. In this work, we present methods to improve language identification of romanized text by improving methods to synthesize training sets. We find that training on synthetic samples which incorporate natural spelling variation yields higher language identification system accuracy than including available naturally occurring examples in the training set or even training higher capacity models. We demonstrate new state-of-the-art language identification performance on romanized text from 20 Indic languages in the Bhasha-Abhijnaanam evaluation set (Madhani et al., 2023a), improving test F1 from the reported 74.7% (using a pretrained neural model) to 85.4% using a linear classifier trained solely on synthetic data and 88.2% when also training on available harvested text. View details Analyzing Similarity Metrics for Data Selection for Language Model Pretraining Dylan Sam Ayan Chakrabarti Afshin Rostamizadeh Srikumar Ramalingam Gui Citovsky Sanjiv Kumar Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2025) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Measuring similarity between training examples is critical for curating high-quality and diverse pretraining datasets for language models. However, similarity is typically computed with a generic off-the-shelf embedding model that has been trained for tasks such as retrieval. Whether these embedding-based similarity metrics are well-suited for pretraining data selection remains largely unexplored. In this paper, we propose a new framework to assess the suitability of a similarity metric specifically for data curation in language model pretraining applications. Our framework's first evaluation criterion captures how well distances reflect generalization in pretraining loss between different training examples. Next, we use each embedding model to guide a standard diversity-based data curation algorithm and measure its utility by pretraining a language model on the selected data and evaluating downstream task performance. Finally, we evaluate the capabilities of embeddings to distinguish between examples from different data sources. With these evaluations, we demonstrate that standard off-the-shelf embedding models are not well-suited for the pretraining data curation setting, underperforming even remarkably simple embeddings that are extracted from models trained on the same pretraining corpus. Our experiments are performed on the Pile, for pretraining a 1.7B parameter language model on 200B tokens. We believe our analysis and evaluation framework serves as a foundation for the future design of embeddings that specifically reason about similarity in pretraining datasets. View details Invisible Labor in Open Source Software Ecosystems John Meluso Amanda Casari Katie McLaughlin Milo Trujillo Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction (2025), pp. 1-32 Preview Preview abstract Invisible labor is work that is not fully visible, not appropriately compensated, or both. In open source software (OSS) ecosystems, essential tasks that do not involve code (like content moderation) often become invisible to the detriment of individuals and organizations. However, invisible labor is so difficult to measure that we do not know how much of OSS activities are invisible. Our study addresses this challenge, demonstrating that roughly half of OSS work is invisible. We do this by developing a survey technique with cognitive anchoring that measures OSS developer self-assessments of labor visibility and attribution. Survey respondents (n = 142) reported that their work is more likely to be non-visible or partially visible (i.e. visible to at most 1 other person) than fully visible (i.e. visible to 2 or more people). Furthermore, cognitively anchoring participants to the idea of high work visibility increased perceptions of labor visibility and decreased visibility importance compared to anchoring to low work visibility. This suggests that advertising OSS activities as “open” may not make labor visible to most people, but rather lead contributors to overestimate labor visibility. We therefore add to a growing body of evidence that designing systems that recognize all kinds of labor as legitimate contributions is likely to improve fairness in software development while providing greater transparency into work designs that help organizations and communities achieve their goals. View details High-Dimensional Calibration from Swap Regret Maxwell Fishelson Noah Golowich Mehryar Mohri Jon Schneider 2025 Preview Preview abstract We present new efficient algorithms for high-dimensional calibration via reduction to the TreeSwap algorithm of Dagan et al. View details 21 22 23 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
