 Publications – Google Research window.dataLayer = window.dataLayer || []; function glueCookieNotificationBarLoaded() { (function(w,d,s,l,i){w[l]=w[l]||[];w[l].push({'gtm.start': new Date().getTime(),event:'gtm.js'});var f=d.getElementsByTagName(s)[0], j=d.createElement(s),dl=l!='dataLayer'?'&l='+l:'';j.async=true;j.src= 'https://www.googletagmanager.com/gtm.js?id='+i+dl;f.parentNode.insertBefore(j,f); })(window,document,'script','dataLayer','GTM-K8QBZ7Q'); } Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 541 - 555 of 676 publications chip template Remove Block level verification accelerates speculative decoding Ziteng Sun Uri Mendlovic Yaniv Leviathan Asaf Aharoni Jae Ro Ahmad Beirami Ananda Theertha Suresh 2025 Preview Preview abstract Speculative decoding has shown to be an effective method for lossless acceleration of large language models during inference. In each iteration, the algorithm first uses a smaller model to draft a block of tokens. The tokens are then verified by the large model in parallel and only a subset of tokens will be kept to guarantee that the distribution of the final output is identical to that of the distribution of the large model. In prior speculative decoding works, the draft verification is performed token-by-token independently. Somewhat surprisingly, we show that this approach is sub-optimal. We propose a simple, easy-to-implement improved draft verification algorithm that provides additional wall-clock speedup by verifying the entire blocks jointly without incurring additional computation cost and draft tokens. We show that the proposed mechanism is never worse than the standard token-level verification and optimal in the expected number of accepted tokens. We also provide another variant verification algorithm which might be of independent interest. We empirically evaluate our proposed block-level verification algorithm in a wide range of tasks and datasets, and observe consistent improvements in wall-clock speedup when compared to the standard token-level verification algorithm. While the improvements are not huge, the change is minimal and adds no code complexity or other overhead. We recommend our block verification algorithm be used by default by all speculative decoding implementations. View details Item language model Anushya Subbiah Li Yang Vikram Aggarwal 2025 Preview Preview abstract Embeddings are extensively used in many domains to represent information aboutdomain entities in a compressed manner. In recommendation systems, theseembeddings are trained to extract meaningful information about an item/user fromcollaborative filtering data consisting users ratings or implicit feedback on items.These behavioral embeddings are usually not trained on data from language domain,but they encode very useful behavioral information which cannot be describedusing language. This collaborative data and behavioral entities(users/items) arenot well represented in large language model (LLM) pretraining data as they arenot textual and are specific to the recommendation system/product. Bridging thisgap between behavioral understanding and language understanding can enable newitem and language interleaved tasks. In our work we show how we can efficientlyadapt rich behavioral embeddings and use as behavioral input representation inpre-trained LLM. To achieve this we adapt Querying Transformer technique witha new item contrastive loss and show improved item-text joint understanding inPALM2. Finally, we also demonstrate improved capabilities in recommendationdomain than using the behavioral embeddings directly as input to PALM2 View details Improved Estimation of Ranks for Learning Item Recommenders with Negative Sampling Steffen Rendle Anushya Subbiah Vikram Aggarwal (2025) Preview Preview abstract Growing number of recommendable items (# of movies, music, products). Sample negative items to overcome computational cost of training on full set of negative items. Rank is computed based on sample. View details LLMs achieve adult human performance on higher-order theory of mind tasks Winnie Street Oliver Siy Geoff Keeling Adrien Baranes Benjamin Barnett Michael McKibben Tatenda Kanyere Alison Lentz Blaise Aguera-Arcas Robin I.M. Dunbar Frontiers in Human Neuroscience (2025) Preview Preview abstract This paper examines the extent to which large language models (LLMs) are able to perform tasks which require higher-order theory of mind (ToM)–the human ability to reason about multiple mental and emotional states in a recursive manner (e.g. I think that you believe that she knows). This paper builds on prior work by introducing a handwritten test suite – Multi-Order Theory of Mind Q&A – and using it to compare the performance of five LLMs of varying sizes and training paradigms to a newly gathered adult human benchmark. We find that GPT-4 and Flan-PaLM reach adult-level and near adult-level performance on our ToM tasks overall, and that GPT-4 exceeds adult performance on 6th order inferences. Our results suggest that there is an interplay between model size and finetuning for higher-order ToM performance, and that the linguistic abilities of large models may support more complex ToM inferences. Given the important role that higher-order ToM plays in group social interaction and relationships, these findings have significant implications for the development of a broad range of social, educational and assistive LLM applications. View details Titans: Learning to Memorize at Test Time Ali Behrouz Peilin Zhong Vahab Mirrokni The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) (2025) Preview Preview abstract Over more than a decade there has been an extensive research effort of how effectively utilize recurrent models and attentions. While recurrent models aim to compress the data into a fixed-size memory (called hidden state), attention allows attending to the entire context window, capturing the direct dependencies of all tokens. This more accurate modeling of dependencies, however, comes with a quadratic cost, limiting the model to a fixed-length context. We present a new neural long-term memory module that learns to memorize historical context and helps an attention to attend to the current context while utilizing long past information. We show that this neural memory has the advantage of a fast parallelizable training while maintaining a fast inference. From a memory perspective, we argue that attention due to its limited context but accurate dependency modeling performs as a short-term memory, while neural memory due to its ability to memorize the data, acts as a long-term, more persistent, memory. Based on these two modules, we introduce a new family of architectures, called Titans, and present three variants to address how one can effectively incorporate memory into this architecture. Our experimental results on language modeling tasks show that Titans are more effective than Transformers and recent modern linear recurrent models. They further can \emph{effectively} scale to larger than 2M context window size with higher accuracy in needle-in-haystack tasks compared to baselines. View details Almost Optimal Fully Dynamic k-Center Clustering with Recourse Sayan Bhattacharya Martin Costa Ermiya Farokhnejad Silvio Lattanzi Nikos Parotsidis 2025 International Conference on Machine Learning (2025) Preview Preview abstract In this paper, we consider the \emph{metric $k$-center} problem in the fully dynamic setting, where we are given a metric space $(V,d)$ evolving via a sequence of point insertions and deletions and our task is to maintain a subset $S \subseteq V$ of at most $k$ points that minimizes the objective $\max_{x \in V} \min_{y \in S}d(x, y)$. We want to design our algorithm so that we minimize its \emph{approximation ratio}, \emph{recourse} (the number of changes it makes to the solution $S$) and \emph{update time} (the time it takes to handle an update). We give a simple algorithm for dynamic $k$-center that maintains a $O(1)$-approximate solution with $O(1)$ amortized recourse and $\tilde O(k)$ amortized update time, \emph{obtaining near-optimal approximation, recourse and update time simultaneously}. We obtain our result by combining a variant of the dynamic $k$-center algorithm of Bateni et al.~[SODA'23] with the dynamic sparsifier of Bhattacharya et al.~[NeurIPS'23]. View details FoodLens: Fine-grained and multi-label classification ofIndian Food Images Narayan Hegde Pradeep Kumar S Jatin Alla Ashwin Vaswani Shivani Kapania Praneeth Netrapalli Yashas Samaga B L 2025 Preview Preview abstract India has rich cultural diversity which reflects in the variety of food. More than 100k photos are submitted each day onGoogle Maps on Indian restaurants and many more on social media channels. Computer vision has played a key role in parsing food images for automated tagging, nutrition profiling and many more. How-ever, existing state of art food AI-based classification models trained on global food datasets have suboptimal performance on Indian food images. These are attributed to unique challenges in Indian food like lack of representation in food datasets, multiple dishes in the images and fine grained variety of dishes. To address these challenges, we curated an annotated dataset of 30K food images consisting of140+ popular dishes from restaurant menus across India. These images have multi label and fine grained annotations for each dish in the image. All the aggregated popular foods are mapped on a hierarchical tree which models a categorical breakdown of Indian food. We developed a custom deep learning classification model to learn from hierarchy and multilabel information in the Indian food images. CHAMP method shows 5-10% better classification accuracy on Indian food dataset at fine and coarse grained levels compared to state of art food classification models with comparable results for other food bench-mark datasets. View details Preference Adaptive and Sequential Text-to-Image Generation Ofir Nabati Guy Tennenholtz Chih-wei Hsu Moonkyung Ryu Deepak Ramachandran Yinlam Chow Sean Li Craig Boutilier 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-25), Vancouver (2025), pp. 45362-45394 Preview Preview abstract We address the problem of interactive text-to-image (T2I) generation, designing a reinforcement learning (RL) agent which iteratively improves a set of generated images for a user through a sequence of prompt expansions. Using human raters, we create a novel dataset of sequential preferences, which we leverage, together with large-scale open-source (non-sequential) datasets. We construct user-preference and user-choice models using an EM strategy and identify varying user preference types. We then leverage a large multimodal language model (LMM) and a value-based RL approach to suggest an adaptive and diverse slate of prompt expansions to the user. Our Preference Adaptive and Sequential Text-to-image Agent (PASTA) extends T2I models with adaptive multi-turn capabilities, fostering collaborative co-creation and addressing uncertainty or underspecification in a user's intent. We evaluate PASTA using human raters, showing significant improvement compared to baseline methods. We also open-source our sequential rater dataset and simulated user-rater interactions to support future research in user-centric multi-turn T2I systems. View details Automated Quantum Chemistry Code Generation with the $p^\daggerq$ Package Lauren Koulias Marcus Liebenthal Run R. Li Nicholas Rubin Albert Eugene DePrince III J. Phys. Chem. A 2025, 129, 29, 6679–6693 (2025) Preview Preview abstract We present the most recent version of the \pq package, which is a Python library for generating equations and computer code for many-body quantum chemistry methods. Originally developed for prototyping single-reference electronic structure methods such as standard coupled-cluster (CC) and equation-of-motion (EOM) CC theory, the functionality in \pq has expanded to include boson operators, coupled fermion-boson operators, unitary cluster operators, non-particle-conserving EOM operators, spin tracing, multiple single-particle subspaces, and more. Additional developments allow for the generation of C++ and Python code that maximizes memory efficiency via careful analysis of contraction order and the reuse of intermediate tensor containers and minimizes floating-point operations by both contraction order and fusing like terms. View details High-fidelity ensemble simulations of large-scale wildfires for fire-impact assessment Karl Alexander Toepperwien Qing Wang Matthias Ihme Yi-fan Chen John Anderson (2025) Preview Preview abstract With the increasing severity and frequency of large wildfires, there is a critical need for improved modeling capabilities to inform mitigation plans for fire management and risk mitigation. In particular, high-fidelity modeling tools are needed to provide reliable predictions of fire-spread behavior to support scientific inquiry and fire-risk assessment, as well as landscape management at an early stage. However, because of the computational complexity, physics- based models are largely limited to simulating a few conditions. We present a high-fidelity simulation framework that takes advantage of emerging programming paradigms, novel computing hardware architecture, and ensemble calculations for simulating large-scale wildfires scenarios at affordable cost, thereby enabling the parametric study and statistical analysis of wildfires scenarios under consideration of changing environmental conditions, ignition probabilities, and vegetation and fuel-moisture regimes. We discuss details of the simulation framework that is based on TensorFlow and the utility of ensemble simulations to examine fire- spread behavior in the presence of coupled wind-slope conditions that remain an outstanding scientific challenge for fire-spread predictions. View details Deep Fusion: Efficient Network Training via Pre-trained Initializations Hanna Mazzawi Xavi Gonzalvo Benoit Dherin Michael Wunder Sammy Jerome ICML (2025) Preview Preview abstract In recent years, deep learning has made remarkable progress in a wide range of domains, with a particularly notable impact on natural language processing tasks. One of the challenges associated with training deep neural networks is the need for large amounts of computational resources and time. In this paper, we present Deep Fusion, an efficient approach to network training that leverages pre-trained initializations of smaller networks. We show that Deep Fusion accelerates the training process, reduces computational requirements, and leads to improved generalization performance on a variety of NLP tasks and T5 model sizes. Our experiments demonstrate that Deep Fusion is a practical and effective approach to reduce the training time and resource consumption while maintaining, or even surpassing, the performance of traditional training methods. View details Investigating extreme fire behavior in complex terrain using high-resolution large-eddy simulations on ML-enabled compute infrastructure Karl Alexander Toepperwien Qing Wang Matthias Ihme Yi-fan Chen John Anderson Cenk Gazen 2025 Preview Preview abstract Wildland fires in regions of complex terrain are often associated with extreme fire behavior. Understanding the interaction between complex terrain and atmospheric flows that results in these extreme conditions is thus an important endeavor. In particular, sloped terrain can lead to highly dynamic wind patterns, thereby enhancing turbulence which in turn directly affect all modes of heat transfer, resulting in more severe fire behavior. Thus, by leveraging a recently developed physics-based solver Swirl-LM based on TensorFlow and running on Tensor Processing Units, we investigate extreme fire behavior in complex terrain in a prescribed fire scenario. We discuss how thermal instabilities contribute to turbulence generation, and how coupled fire-atmosphere interactions generate a circulation of the convective smoke column. Comparison with experimental data allows us to validate our numerical models and opens pathways for simulations of extreme fires in complex terrain at affordable computational cost. View details Gensors: Authoring Personalized Visual Sensors with Multimodal Foundation Models and Reasoning Michael Xieyang Liu Savvas Petridis Vivian Tsai Alex Fiannaca Alex Olwal Michael Terry Carrie Cai ACM IUI 2025 (2025) Preview Preview abstract Multimodal large language models (MLLMs), with their expansive world knowledge and reasoning capabilities, present a unique opportunity for end-users to create personalized AI sensors capable of reasoning about complex situations. A user could describe a desired sensing task in natural language (e.g., “let me know if my toddler is getting into mischief in the living room”), with the MLLM analyzing the camera feed and responding within just seconds. In a formative study, we found that users saw substantial value in defining their own sensors, yet struggled to articulate their unique personal requirements to the model and debug the sensors through prompting alone. To address these challenges, we developed Gensors, a system that empowers users to define customized sensors supported by the reasoning capabilities of MLLMs. Gensors 1) assists users in eliciting requirements through both automatically-generated and manually created sensor criteria, 2) facilitates debugging by allowing users to isolate and test individual criteria in parallel, 3) suggests additional criteria based on user-provided images, and 4) proposes test cases to help users “stress test” sensors on potentially unforeseen scenarios. In a 12-participant user study, users reported significantly greater sense of control, understanding, and ease of communication when defining sensors using Gensors. Beyond addressing model limitations, Gensors supported users in debugging, eliciting requirements, and expressing unique personal requirements to the sensor through criteria-based reasoning; it also helped uncover users’ own “blind spots” by exposing overlooked criteria and revealing unanticipated failure modes. Finally, we describe insights into how unique characteristics of MLLMs–such as hallucinations and inconsistent responses–can impact the sensor-creation process. Together, these findings contribute to the design of future MLLM-powered sensing systems that are intuitive and customizable by everyday users. View details A Unified Approach to Submodular Maximization under Noise Kshipra Bhawalkar Lane Tao Lin Zhe Feng Yang Cai Christopher Liaw The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (2025) Preview Preview abstract We consider the problem of maximizing a submodular function with access to a noisy value oracle for the function instead of an exact value oracle. Similar to prior work, we assume that the noisy oracle is persistent in that multiple calls to the oracle for a specific set always return the same value. In this model, Hassidim and Singer (2017) design a (1−1/e)-approximation algorithm for monotone submodular maximization subject to a cardinality constraint, and Huang et al (2022) design a (1−1/e)/2-approximation algorithm for monotone submodular maximization subject to any arbitrary matroid constraint. In this paper, we design a meta-algorithm that allows us to take any "robust" algorithm for exact submodular maximization as a black box and transform it into an algorithm for the noisy setting while retaining the approximation guarantee. By using the meta-algorithm with the measured continuous greedy algorithm, we obtain a (1−1/e)-approximation (resp. 1/e-approximation) for monotone (resp. non-monotone) submodular maximization subject to a matroid constraint under noise. Furthermore, by using the meta-algorithm with the double greedy algorithm, we obtain a 1/2-approximation for unconstrained (non-monotone) submodular maximization under noise. View details Examination of Physical Coupling Processes in Wildfires Through High-fidelity Ensemble Simulations Karl Alexander Toepperwien Qing Wang Matthias Ihme Yi-fan Chen John Anderson Cenk Gazen 2025 Preview Preview abstract Wildfires pose serious threats to society, environment, and ecosystems as they can disrupt, damage, and destroy infrastructure, services, and properties. To examine the complex interaction of wildfires, arising from strong coupling precession between combustion, atmospheric flow, heat-transfer, topography, and fuel properties, we present a simulation framework that integrates a high-fidelity ML-enabled simulations framework for wildfire predictions with a sampling technique to perform high-resolution ensemble simulations of large-scale wildfire scenarios. The simulation results are compared to existing experimental data for fire acceleration, mean rate of spread, and fireline intensity. Strong coupling between key compounding parameters (wind speed and slope) are observed for fire spread and intermittency. Scaling relations are derived and presented to delineate regimes associated with plume-driven and convection-driven fire spread. View details 37 38 39 … of 46 of 46 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls × var scriptUrl = "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/v27_1/material-components-web.min.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://www.youtube.com/player_api"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "/gr/static/js/googleresearch.js?id=1db86c2c4ce1c6902b92830acba1963e"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scriptUrl = "https://support.google.com/inapp/api.js"; var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); var scripts = [ "https://www.gstatic.com/glue/cookienotificationbar/cookienotificationbar.min.js" ]; scripts.forEach(function(scriptUrl) { var scriptElement = document.createElement('script'); scriptElement.async = false; scriptElement.src = scriptUrl; scriptElement.setAttribute("data-glue-cookie-notification-bar-category", "2B"); document.body.appendChild(scriptElement); });
