WoG
🏂
Wo
rld
G
uidance:
              World Modeling in Condition Space for Action Generation
Yue Su
,
Sijin Chen
,
Haixin Shi
,
Mingyu Liu
,
Zhengshen Zhang
,
Ningyuan Huang
,
Weiheng Zhong
,
Zhengbang Zhu
,
Yuxiao Liu
†
,
Xihui Liu
†
ByteDance Seed
MMLab@HKU
† Corresponding Authors
( Have a try to click the 🏂 in the title for music 🎻 on and off. )
ICML 2026
paper
arXiv
code
Modeling as Condition: Less is More
Click on images to enlarge and view details.
WoG Method Overview
Comic illustration powered by NotebookLM
Comic illustration powered by NotebookLM
Comic illustration powered by NotebookLM
Comic illustration powered by NotebookLM
Comic illustration powered by NotebookLM
Comic illustration powered by NotebookLM
Comic illustration powered by NotebookLM
Leveraging future observation modeling to facilitate action generation presents a promising avenue
        for extending the capabilities of VLA models.
However, existing approaches struggle to strike a balance between
        maintaining compact, predictable future representations and preserving sufficient fine-grained information to guide precise action generation
. To
        address this limitation, we propose
WoG
, a VLA that directly maps future observations into
        compact conditions injected into the action inference pipeline. Subsequently, the VLA is trained
        to simultaneously predict these compressed conditions alongside future actions, thereby achieving effective
world modeling within the condition
        space
. We demonstrate that modeling and predicting conditions not only facilitates
        fine-grained action generation but also exhibits
        superior generalization abilities. Moreover, it learns effectively from extensive human manipulation videos.
Condition in and Condition out: Complete Inference
To identify a
non-redundant predictive space
for world action model, the space must satisfy the criterion that its information serves
      as a
sufficient and effective condition
for action generation. By virtue of this role, such a space is intrinsically
highly relevant to action
; consequently, for a VLA model
      inherently designed to model actions, inferring this space becomes a tractable task.
To discover such a space, we argue that the most efficient strategy is to directly incorporate
      future observations as conditions into the action inference pipeline
. The representation encoded through this pipeline thus naturally constitutes the desired
      efficient condition space. Subsequently, We decouples future observations from the pipeline and simultaneously predicts these future conditions alongside actions, thereby transferring the knowledge of
      future conditions into the VLA.
WoG
for Fine-grained Action Generation
In real-world experiments,
WoG
demonstrates distinct advantages in fine-grained control, robust generalization, 
      and high scalability across diverse manipulation tasks. For in-distribution scenarios involving rigid, articulated, 
      and deformable objects,
WoG
significantly outperforms existing baselines by providing
precise, future-aware guidance essential 
      for complex dynamics and collision-aware trajectory planning
. Crucially,
WoG
exhibits exceptional resilience in Out-of-Distribution 
      (OOD) settings, such as novel objects, background shifts, and severe lighting changes, since its compact condition space effectively
distills action-relevant dynamics from pre-trained visual encoders while filtering out redundant visual noise
. Furthermore, 
      the framework shows remarkable cross-embodiment scalability; it can seamlessly integrate
large-scale unannotated human videos and 
      heterogeneous UMI data
to capture embodiment-agnostic motion priors, which yields a performance boost in downstream tasks.
"put the green cup into the plate"
"put the red cup into the plate" (unseen)
"fold the brown towel" (unseen)
"fold the blue towel"
"fold the white towel"
"close the microwave"
"fold the blue towel" (light change)
"put the green cup into the plate"
"put the green cup into the plate" (background change)
"fold the white towel" (background change)
"put the green cup into the plate"
"fold the white towel"
Any Videos are Conditions
WoG
learns effectively from human videos with or without action annotations.
      We trained the model on 1920 hours of unannotated human manipulation videos (
only conditions supervision in the second stage
) and achieved explict improvements in 
      pick-and-place performance and generalization ability. Then, we annotated 11% (220 hours) of the videos with actions to simulate the real-world condition
where annotated 
      human manipulation videos are sparse, while unannotated videos are abundant
. By incorporating these 220 hours of videos for human 
      action supervision in the first stage and condition supervision on the entire 1920 hours in the second stage, the model achieved 
      improved performance and generalization across various tasks.
Citation
@article{WoG,
        title={World Guidance: World Modeling in Condition Space for Action Generation}, 
        author={Yue Su and Sijin Chen and Haixin Shi and Mingyu Liu and Zhengshen Zhang and Ningyuan Huang and Weiheng Zhong and Zhengbang Zhu and Yuxiao Liu and Xihui Liu},
        journal={arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.22010},
        year={2026},
  }
Website Template Designed by
Yue Su