Valve: Production Online–Offline Inference Colocation with Jointly-Bounded Preemption Latency and Rate

Report GitHub Issue
×

Title:

Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:

Description:

Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub

arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×

Back to arXiv

Why HTML?

Report Issue

Back to Abstract

Download PDF

Abstract

1 Introduction

2 Background

2.1 Low GPU Utilization of Production Workloads

2.2 Key Requirements for Inference Online-Offline Colocation in Production

2.3 Existing Solutions for Online-Offline Colocation

2.4 Challenges

3 Valve Overview

4 Channel-Controlled Compute Isolation

4.1 GPU Channel Control

4.2 On-GPU Offline Workload Scheduling

5 Sub-layer Memory Reclamation with Dynamic Reservation

6 Valve Cluster Scheduling

7 Evaluation

7.1 Production Impact of Valve

7.2 Comparison with Alternative Colocation Approaches

8 Related Work

9 Conclusion

References

License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license

arXiv:2604.07874v1 [cs.OS] 09 Apr 2026

Valve: Production Online–Offline Inference Colocation with Jointly-Bounded Preemption Latency and Rate

Fangyue Liu*

Affiliation: Peking University

Affiliation: Tencent

  
Hua Liu*

Affiliation: Tencent

  
Xinyuan Lyu*

Affiliation: Tencent

  
Shuo Ai

Affiliation: Tencent

  
Hao Liang

Affiliation: Tencent

  
Lingpeng Chen

Affiliation: Tencent

  
Ziqian Hu

Affiliation: Tencent

  
Chong Zha

Affiliation: Tencent

  
Xin Jin

Affiliation: Peking University

  
Hanmei Luo

Affiliation: Tencent

  
Peng Chen

Affiliation: Tencent

Abstract

LLM inference powers latency-critical production services nowadays.
The bursty nature of inference traffic results in over-provisioning,
which in turn leads to resource underutilization.
While online-offline colocation promises to utilize idle capacity,
broad production deployment must overcome two major challenges:
(i) large online interference due to slow or frequent preemptions,
and (ii) extensive frameworks and drivers modifications, to colocate different models and support preemptions.
We present Valve, a production-friendly colocation system that jointly bounds
preemption latency and preemption rate.
Specifically, Valve enables sub-millisecond compute preemption at most once per online request,
and rate-limited sub-layer memory reclamation.
These guaranties are provided by a GPU runtime that combines channel-controlled
compute isolation, page-fault-free memory reclamation, and dynamic memory reservation.
Critically, Valve is practical to deploy, requiring one line of driver modification
and 20 lines of framework patch.
Deployed on 8,054 GPUs in production, Valve improves cluster utilization by 34.6%,
which translates to a 2,170 GPU save.
This efficiency gains is achieved with minimal online interference,
incurring TTFT increase and TPOT increase across workloads.

Keywords: GPU sharing, Inference, Scheduling
††affiliationnotice: *Equal contribution.

1 Introduction

Large language model (LLM) inference powers a growing set of workloads.
These include latency-critical production services, such as conversational
assistants, code generation, multimodal tasks (OpenAI, 2022; Anthropic, 2023; Liu et al., 2024; Jimenez et al., 2023; Jain et al., 2024).
LLM also serves batch processing workloads, such as document processing, data analysis (Lai et al., 2023).
Beyond user-facing applications, inference has also become a building block for
training workflows, including data curation, post-training actor rollouts, and critic scoring (Guo et al., 2025; Lee et al., 2023).

Despite their importance, LLM inference clusters in production still suffer from
low utilization. This is primarily because operators must provision for bursty demand under strict latency SLAs, resulting in significant idle capacity off-peak.
In practice, the burstiness comes from two main sources.
First, online services may experience unpredictable traffic spikes (Xiang et al., 2025),
which are further amplified by customized or fine-tuned models.
Second, inference in training workflows typically arrives in periodic large batches,
causing volatile GPU memory usage (Zhong et al., 2025; Wu, 2025).
Harvesting idle capacity to improve utilization remains one of
the central challenges in LLM inference deployments.

Figure 1: Comparison of online-offline colocation approaches.

A promising direction is to colocate latency-critical online serving
with offline inference on the same GPU, which utilizes the idle capacity
to run preemptible offline workloads.
In practice, however, we find two key obstacles that limit broad deployments
of existing approaches (Wu et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2025):
interference with online workloads caused by high preemption
latency or frequency, and extensive modifications to GPU drivers or inference frameworks.

Coarse-grained preemption—e.g., kernel-level (Wu et al., 2023) (which degrades to iteration-level when CUDA graphs are enabled) and
transformer-layer-level (Qiao et al., 2024)—incurs preemption latencies of up to tens of milliseconds.
Immediate preemption (Fan et al., 2025; Harris, 2017) can react quickly, but may trigger preemptions frequently.
Moreover, many existing approaches require extensive framework or driver modifications (Ruan et al., 2023; Qiao et al., 2024),
which hinders deployment in production environments.

To address these challenges, we present Valve, a production-friendly online-offline
colocation system that jointly bounds preemption latency and preemption rate,
while imposing negligible interference with online services. Valve builds on three key ideas:

(1) Channel-controlled compute isolation. Valve uses GPU channel control to
preempt and recover offline execution within sub-millisecond latency. Combined with online request lifecycle awareness, Valve gates offline kernels outside the lifetime of an online request, ensuring each online request is preempted at most once.

(2) Sub-layer memory reclamation with dynamic reservation.
Valve reclaims KV cache promptly by coordinating memory reclamation with compute preemption. After preempting compute, Valve remaps reclaimed pages to a quarantine page and exposes invalidated page IDs to the framework for recomputation, preventing unrecoverable page faults. Valve further regulates reclamation rate by dynamically reserving memory for online workloads.

(3) Throughput-aware scheduling. A burst and multi-GPU aware
scheduler models offline throughput on harvested GPUs
and assigns offline workloads, meeting their SLAs.

We build Valve as a production-friendly system consisting of a node-level runtime
and a cluster-level scheduler. Valve requires only a one-line driver
modification and 20-line framework patching, making it easy to deploy in production.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:

•

We design a production-friendly runtime that enables
sub-millisecond compute preemption at most once per online request,
and sub-layer memory reclamation with a rate-bounded reclamation frequency.

•

We develop a burst- and multi-GPU-aware scheduler that places offline
jobs smartly on harvested GPUs to meet throughput SLAs while improving utilization.

•

We deploy Valve in a production cluster with 8,054 GPUs, improving
average utilization by 34.6%, which translates to saving 2,170 GPUs. Across workloads, Valve incurs TTFT increase and TPOT increase.

2 Background

We first analyze why GPU utilization is low in production by characterizing workload burstiness
and SLA requirements. We then derive key requirements for production-friendly online–offline
inference colocation, review existing systems and their limitations, and outline the main challenges.

2.1 Low GPU Utilization of Production Workloads

Production LLM inference is bursty in both compute and KV-cache usage.
To meet strict latency SLAs, online services reserve peak headroom, leaving GPUs underutilized on average.

Burstiness in compute and KV-cache memory.
Each request uses GPU compute and allocates KV cache throughout its lifecycle.
As a result, compute utilization often switches between idle and fully busy.
Meanwhile, KV cache grows with the number of concurrent context tokens, and can spike under batch arrivals.
Figure 2 measures burstiness across workloads using CV
and Figure 3 shows two typical patterns:
some workloads are bursty in both compute and KV cache,
while other workloads are bursty mostly only in compute.

Production workloads and their SLAs.
Production inference includes both online and offline workloads.
Online inference is user-facing (or latency-critical stages in post-training) and must meet strict latency SLAs,
so it can tolerate almost no interference.
Offline inference often requires only throughput SLAs, or has no SLA.
To meet online SLAs under bursty demand, operators overprovision GPUs, which leads to low average utilization.

Figure 2: Coefficient of Variation (CV) analysis of GPU utilization and KV cache utilization.

Figure 3: GPU utilization and KV cache utilization time series for user-facing inference (bottom)
and reward model inference (top). They show different degrees of burstiness in KV cache utilization.

Table 1: Comparison of schemes for online-offline colocation.

TGS
Conserve
Gpreempt
Valve

Compute Interference
Iteration-level
Layer-level
Frequent
ms per-request

Memory Interference
Frequent
Layer-level
Not handling
Sub-layer, limited rate

Framework Modifications
0 LOC
5000 LOC
0 LOC
20 LOC

Driver Modifications
0 LOC
0 LOC
200 LOC
1 LOC

2.2 Key Requirements for Inference Online-Offline Colocation in Production

Extremely low interference for online workloads.
To meet strict SLAs for real-time online inference, the system must introduce almost no extra delay.
Interference comes from both compute and memory effects, and is driven by how long each preemption lasts and how often preemptions happen. Thus, the key goal is to bound both
preemption latency and preemption rate.

Minimal modifications to drivers and frameworks.
Production deployment requires minimal modifications to GPU drivers and inference frameworks.
Extensive modifications increase maintenance burden and limit broader adoption.

Throughput SLAs for offline workloads.
The system should place offline workloads on suitable nodes to meet throughput SLAs, while maximizing cluster throughput.

2.3 Existing Solutions for Online-Offline Colocation

A complementary line of work colocates latency-critical online inference with offline jobs on the same GPU,
to backfill idle capacity while preserving strict online SLAs (Wu et al., 2023; Han et al., 2022; Qiao et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2025; Shen et al., 2025; Prabhu et al., 2025; Xu et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2025). Table 1 compares these systems.
In production, they commonly face two obstacles: (i) noticeable interference with online workloads
(due to slow or frequent preemptions), and
(ii) extensive driver/framework modifications that make deployment and maintenance hard.

Compute-side preemption.
TGS (Wu et al., 2023), XSched (Shen et al., 2025) Lv2 intercepts kernel launches, but LLM serving often relies on CUDA Graphs,
which bundle kernels of one inference iteration into a single graph,
so preemption degrades to graph-level granularity.
Conserve (Qiao et al., 2024) inserts checkpoints into inference code and preempts at the transformer-layer level,
but long prefills in production batch inference (e.g., 32k tokens) can stretch layer-level preemption delay to hundres of milliseconds.
The preempted iteration is duplicated, decreasing offline throughput.
Gpreempt (Fan et al., 2025) uses a CUDA-driver timeslice for automatic switching, but the decode phase has short gaps between iterations (Figure 4),
so it may run offline kernels once per iteration, causing frequent preemptions and increased queue length.

Figure 4: Distribution of gap interval between decode iterations.

Memory-side KV-cache isolation.
vAttention, Conserve, vTensor, and Prism virtualize KV-cache placement via VMM indirection and resize memory footprints on demand (Prabhu et al., 2025; Qiao et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2024; Yu et al., 2025).
However, they do not fully solve how to reclaim offline KV memory quickly and safely when online demand spikes.
For example, Conserve (Qiao et al., 2024) can reclaim KV cache only at transformer-layer boundaries, which can delay reclamation by up to hundreds of milliseconds during long prefills.
Moreover, prior work largely does not discuss how to control the reclamation frequency.
In practice, inference workloads change their memory regions and sizes over time;
naively relying on UVM (Harris, 2017) or aggressively sharing memory can trigger reclamation repeatedly, causing severe interference to online workloads.

Deployability.
Many systems also fall short in deployability.
Conserve (Qiao et al., 2024) requires extensive inference-framework changes,
often involving thousands of lines of code (e.g., injecting checkpoints into inference code and adding new scheduling modules).
REEF (Han et al., 2022) requires replacing the compiler toolchain with a custom compiler, which in turn demands major changes to the user container image. XSched (Shen et al., 2025) Lv3 and REEF only support idempotent operators, but all-reduce in multi-GPU inference and some linear attention kernels are not idempotent,
making the whole CUDA graph unpreemptible.
As a result, no existing approach simultaneously achieves low-interference, LLM-compatible preemption and production-friendly deployability.

2.4 Challenges

We face three challenges in designing a production-friendly online-offline inference colocation system in production.

Challenge 1: Gap-aware sub-millisecond compute interference.
The system must achieve sub-millisecond compute preemption
while not inserting offline wake-ups between online decode iterations.
This requires controllable, fast offline switch, with awareness of online request lifecycles.

Challenge 2: Rate-limited sub-layer memory reclamation.
Online bursts may require reclaiming offline KV cache immediately in sub-layer granualrity.
However, swapping KV pages to CPU is too slow, while invalidating KV pages without coordination
can cause illegal accesses. The system must reclaim memory promptly while not killing offline applications.
Restricting the reclamation frequency with framework transparency is also critical.

Challenge 3: Precise offline performance modeling.
Offline throughput varies with online burstiness and multi-GPU behaviors,
requiring precise modeling and scheduling.

3 Valve Overview

Figure 5: Valve architecture overview.

We introduce Valve, an industrial system for online-offline inference colocation.
Valve is designed to meet three goals: (1) low compute and memory interference to online
workloads, (2) reliable throughput SLAs for offline workloads, and
(3) minimal framework/driver modifications.
Figure 5 shows the overall architecture.

At the node level, the GPU Colocation Runtime
enables compute and memory sharing with low interference
by jointly bounding preemption latency and rate.
For compute, it limits online impact by providing
sub-millisecond, infrequent kernel preemptions via channel control
and workload-aware offline execution control (§4).
For memory, it follows prior work (Prabhu et al., 2025) to
share GPU memory through a global pool with coarse-grained handles
and an allocate–release interface. It bounds memory interference with
fast sub-layer memory reclamation coordinated with compute preemption,
and controls reclamation frequency via MIAD(Multiple Increase, Addictive Decrease)-style online reservation
(§5).
These mechanisms also preserve high offline throughput by harvesting most idle compute cycles; during memory reclamation, selective eviction affects fewer offline requests and safe sub-layer reclamation avoids terminating offline workloads.

These mechanisms also preserve
high offline throughput by harvesting most idles compute cycles, impacting less offline requests during memory preemptions, without terminating offline workloads during memory preemptions.

At the cluster level, online workloads are submitted directly to GPUs,
while offline workloads are submitted to the Cluster Scheduler
(§6). The scheduler
builds a comprehensive performance model of offline workloads on harvested GPUs,
and schedules them to satisfy their throughput SLAs, which is
specified as the fraction of the standalone throughput.

4 Channel-Controlled Compute Isolation

We use workload-aware channel control to achieve two goals:
sub-millisecond preemption latency and at most one preemption per online request.
Channel control provides a fast and precise way to pause and resume offline execution,
while workload awareness triggers preemption in time and avoids frequent preemptions.

Figure 6: Channel control in the kernel launch path.

4.1 GPU Channel Control

Channels in the kernel launch path.
Figure 6 shows the kernel launch path and where GPU channels fit in.
A CUDA stream issues kernel launches through the user-mode driver,
which submits work to a channel managed by the kernel-mode driver (KMD) and the GPU.
A process typically owns one or more channels, which are bound to specific compute engines.
The GPU schedules channels using a hardware-maintained runlist.
Importantly, the KMD exposes standard ioctl interfaces to create, enable, and disable channels,
and to submit work to channels.
These ioctls (I/O control commands) make channels a practical control point for controlling offline compute.

Channel control for portable compute isolation.
Valve uses this ioctl-level control point to preempt and resume offline workloads with low latency.
Specifically, it disables the offline workload’s channel to preempt execution and later re-enables it to resume.
On Pascal+ GPUs, disabling a channel triggers a hardware context save to an on-GPU context-save buffer,
so in-flight kernels can be safely restored after re-enable (e.g., registers and other on-chip state).
These operations take effect within 1 ms, enabling fast preemption without waiting for kernel boundaries.

A practical challenge is that these KMD ioctls require driver-managed identifiers (e.g., GPU-client and channel handles)
that are not exposed through CUDA APIs.
We obtain these identifiers without modifying the driver by intercepting CUDA initialization ioctls:
their arguments contain the GPU-client and channel identifiers, which consistently appear as matched pairs on Pascal+ drivers.
Our colocation runtime records a mapping from each application to its (GPU-client, channel) handles, and then issues the
corresponding disable/enable ioctls on demand.

Optimizing preemption latency for multi‑GPU preemption.
Naively issuing preemption ioctls on a multi-GPU node leads to latency that grows roughly linearly with the number of GPUs.
The bottleneck is a shared write lock that the KMD holds while handling these ioctls across GPUs on the same node.
We find this synchronization is not required for inference tasks.
On Turing+ GPUs, the preemption command can be offloaded directly to the target device without taking the global lock,
reducing kernel-space overhead.
Accordingly, we apply a one-line driver modification which changes the flag used to bypass the lock and offload the command to the channel.
With this modification, preemption latency on an 8-GPU node drops from  ms to  ms.

Figure 7: Sub-layer memory reclamation with dynamic online memory reservation.

4.2 On-GPU Offline Workload Scheduling

Preempting offline workloads.
Our runtime, injected into the online process, intercepts kernel-launch commands to track whether the online workload is active.
When the online workload transitions to busy, the runtime immediately issues channel-disable commands for all offline workloads on the node,
so offline execution is paused promptly.

Waking up offline workloads.
To bound preemption to at most once per online inference request, we do not re-enable offline workloads immediately when the online workload becomes idle,
since short idle gaps can appear between decode iterations.
Instead, we wake up offline workloads only after a cooldown interval during which the online workload stays continuously idle.
We set to twice the maximum gap between decode iterations, as measured by our runtime instrumentation.
This avoids waking offline work in per-iteration gaps and ensures at most one preemption over the lifetime of an online request.

5 Sub-layer Memory Reclamation with Dynamic Reservation

The main bottleneck of online-offline memory sharing is KV-cache reclamation.
When online memory demand spikes, the system may need to unmap and remap offline VMM-mapped KV cache (Prabhu et al., 2025)
on the online critical path.
Valve addresses this with three techniques:
(i) sub-layer memory reclamation to make preemption fast,
(ii) dynamic online memory reservation to reduce interference rate,
and (iii) selective handle reclamation for higher offline throughput without
adding interference.

Sub-layer memory reclamation.
We first focus on reducing reclamation latency.
A natural baseline (Xiang et al., 2025; Qiao et al., 2024) reclaims KV memory only at iteration boundaries or layer boundaries, because unmapping KV pages during kernel execution can lead to unrecoverable memory faults.
However, this coarse granularity can make reclamation slow,
especially when online bursts arrive during a long prefill iteration.
prefill phase
when online bursts arrive during offline prefill iterations.

Valve enables safe sub-layer reclamation by coordinating compute and
memory preemption (Figure 7). When online workloads need memory,
we always disable offline compute first, ensuring
no in-flight kernel can access pages being reclaimed. We then select a set of offline “evictor” memory handles, remap the virtual pages in those handles to a shared
quarantine page, and finally reclaim the memory handles for online workloads. This avoids faults and allows the offline workload to resume later.

Accesses to reclaimed pages can lead to incorrect intermediate tokens. To keep the behavior correct,
Valve records the reclaimed KV page (block) IDs and exposes them through a small patch:
a single callback that returns the invalidated IDs for each request after a decode step.
Across vLLM, SGLang, and TensorRT-LLM, this integration touches at most two scheduler-side functions
and requires fewer than 20 lines of code changes.
The framework then discards intermediate data for affected requests, returns them to the waiting state with only the input and previously generated tokens, and later resume them by recomputing.
This achieves sub-layer reclamation without crashes.

Dynamic MIAD-style memory reservation.
To reduce reclamation frequency within a given budget while maximizing offline memory,
Valve maintains a dynamic online KV-cache headroom as pre-mapped VMM handles.
Valve adapts using MIAD (Multiplicative Increase, Additive Decrease):
on an online pressure event (i.e., when reaches 90% utilization), it multiplicatively increases by a factor
to reserve more mapped handles in advance; when pressure is absent, it shrinks conservatively by releasing one handle every interval .
The release interval is also MIAD-controlled: if the pressure-event rate over a sliding window exceeds the user-specified target,
Valve multiplicatively increases ; otherwise, it decreases . This reservation drives the reclamation rate toward the target.

Selective handle reclamation.
The KV cache is not allocated continuously on the memory handle due to the memory fragment problem,
so one handle can be shared by different numbers of offline requests.
Reclaiming a handle blindly may preempt more requests than necessary.
Valve uses selective handle reclamation (Algorithm 1) to minimize the number of affected offline requests.
Specifically, it greedily selects handles with the lowest marginal token cost, defined as the total number of extra tokens incurred by the additional requests affected by reclaiming that handle.
This improves offline throughput without increasing online interference.

Algorithm 1 Valve selective memory reclamation

0:

 Number of handles ; handle set (equal size);
request cost ; impacted requests

0:

 A handle subset to reclaim

1:

 ,

2:

 for to do

3:

  

4:

  

5:

  

6:

 end for

7:

 return

6 Valve Cluster Scheduling

To satisfy offline throughput SLAs, we build a comprehensive performance model
for offline LLM inference on harvested GPUs.
We characterize a harvested GPU along three aspects:
(i) idle compute fraction; (ii) the burstiness and average
of memory usage; and (iii) the multi-GPU behavior of online workloads.
We formulate it as

(1)

Here, denotes an offline workload and denotes a node.
is the effective throughput of on , and
is its throughput on the monopolized GPU.
We define the three performance factors as follows.

Idle compute fraction.
We measure the idle compute fraction using the colocation runtime as the
fraction of GPU timeslices available to run the offline workload.

Burstiness and average of memory.
GPU memory determines both feasibility and throughput. For each workload , we profile it once at submission to obtain a memory–throughput curve .
Let be the available memory on node . Without eviction, the effective throughput is the time average of over the node’s memory trace.
When dips below the workload’s required memory , the shirnk introduces throughput loss.
We use a workload-specific coefficient to map the expected deficit to throughput loss. The memory factor is formulated as:

(2)

The multi-card behavior.
Online multi-GPU services often use GPUs asynchronously, so activity can be misaligned across cards; in our trace, 32% of instances show only partial overlap.
In contrast, model-parallel offline inference runs in lockstep. Misalignment across cards then creates stragglers and idle gaps, reducing throughput and risking SLA violations.
We quantify cross-card alignment with a pairwise score
, where is overlapping busy time and is union busy time.
At placement, we admit a -GPU job only if all pairs satisfy .

Scheduling.
Building on this model, our scheduler schedules offline workloads to
nodes with guaranteed throughput SLA. Besides, a monitor periodically checks
the past throughput of each offline throughput and evicts those that
persistently violate their SLA for rescheduling.

7 Evaluation

Figure 8: Cluster GPU utilization with Valve.

Figure 9: Deployment scale with Valve.

In this section, we first quantify the production impact of Valve (§ 7.1), then compare it with existing online-offline colocation approaches
in terms of interference to online workloads and throughput of offline workloads (§ 7.2).

7.1 Production Impact of Valve

Deployment.
Valve is deployed in production clusters with 8045 GPU cards.
The clusters serve both online and offline inference workloads.
Valve has been in production for more than three months, with the number of managed
GPU cards increasing over time, illustrated by Figure 9.

Metrics.
We use two metrics to quantify Valve’s end-to-end impact: (i)
improved GPU utilization, which is the fraction of time when GPUs execute offline compute;
and (ii) saved GPU cards. The amount of GPU cards saved by each colocated offline workload
is computed as the throughput normalized by standalone offline throughput.

Results.
Figure 8 shows improved GPU utilization in the production cluster
over one week, with an average of 34.6% improvement.
The inference work done by the offline workloads translates to a saving of 2170 GPU cards.

7.2 Comparison with Alternative Colocation Approaches

Metrics.
We evaluate both the interference to online workloads and the throughput of offline workloads using three metrics:

•

TTFT increase percentage: The increase percentage of online workloads under each strategy, compared with standalone running TTFT.

•

TPOT increase percentage: The increase percentage of online workloads under each strategy, compared with standalone running TPOT.

•

Offline throughput: To compare the throughput of different strategies clearly, we report the normalized throughput, which is the throughput divided by the throughput under no-memory-preemption, i.e. Prism with our compute preemption (Channel+Prism).

Figure 10: Distribution over 10 workloads of (a) TTFT increase percentage (b) TPOT increase percentage and (c) offline throughput under each strategies. Stacked segments indicate the workload percentage in each bin.

Methodology.
We sample 10 online workload and offline workload pairs from production deployments,
and replay them in our test cluster with different colocation strategies.

Baseline techniques.
We consider two orthogonal design dimensions—compute preemption and memory preemption.

Compute preemption.
(1) KernelPreempt: kernel-level preemption—switch at kernel boundaries, adopted by TGS (Wu et al., 2023).
With CUDA graphs, kernel boundaries align with iteration steps, resulting in coarse-grained preemption.
(2) GPreempt: immediate online workload preemption via setting short time slice for
offline workloads and long time slice for online workloads, proposed by GPreempt (Fan et al., 2025).
(3) Channel: our channel-based preemption with workload awareness (§4).

Memory preemption.
(1) UVM (Harris, 2017): allocate normal device memory for online workloads and use CUDA Unified Virtual Memory
for offline workloads, which allows the online workloads to reclaim offline memory as needed.
(2) Prism (Yu et al., 2025): share memory between online and offline workloads via CUDA VMM.
(3) StaticMem: statically allocate unused memory to offline workloads via the CUDA VMM.
The minimum free memory over the past hour is used as the offline limit; online bursts above this
kill offline workloads immediately.
(4) OurMem: our memory preemption(§5)—sub-layer reclamation and MIAD-style dynamic memory reservation
for low reclamation rate.

Baseline combinations.
We evaluate combinations of the above techniques as baselines to assess how
Valve’s preemption mechanisms reduce interference while sustaining
high offline throughput.
We (i) compare KernelPreempt+UVM, Gpreempt+UVM, and Channel+UVM to show the effects of our compute preemption;
(ii) compare Channel+UVM, Channel+Prism, Channel+StaticMem, and Valve to show the effects of our memory preemption.

Results.
Figure 10 illustrates the results.
Valve keeps the online TTFT increase within 5%
and TPOT increase within 2% across all workloads, which is significantly
lower than all baselines.
Meanwhile, Valve maintains similar offline throughput to Channel+Prism where
offline KV cache is not reclaimed, and significantly outperforms UVM-based baselines
and static memory allocation baselines.

For compute preemption,
KernelPreempt suffers from large single preemption latency in all cases
since CUDA graphs make preemption iteration-level;
Gpreempt incurs frequent preemptions because an offline wakeup and preemption happens after each inference iteration. This harms TPOT and increases queue length, which in turn increases TTFT.
In contrast, Valve’s channel-based control with workload awareness
bounds both preemption latency and rate, achieving low compute interference.

For memory preemption, Channel+UVM preempts often: UVM lets offline workloads fill spare online memory,
which is reclaimed whenever online demand spikes; it also cannot use memory already allocated by online workloads,
limiting offline throughput.
Channel+Prism does not reclaim memory, forcing online batch-size reduction and more queueing, increasing TTFT significantly in 4 sampled workloads.
Channel+StaticMem shows low interference but
static allocation underutilizes memory, yielding 9%–100% lower offline throughput in the 4 sampled online workloads with bursty memory usage.
Valve utilizes MIAD-style dynamic reservation and sub-layer fast reclamation
for low memory interference while keeping high offline throughput.

Effectiveness of Valve eviction policy.
We further evaluate our eviction policy under varying reclamation rate and
reclaimed memory size. We compare against a FIFO baseline,
which evicts offline KV cache blocks in first-in-first-out order.
We colocate a 7B online model with a 7B offline model. As shown in
Figure 11(a), by targeting blocks tied to fewer in-flight offline requests,
our policy consistently reduces throughput loss by 22.9%–40.1% over FIFO.

Figure 11: Effectiveness of the eviction selection.

8 Related Work

Autoscaling.
Serverless autoscaling systems (e.g., BlitzScale, ServerlessLLM, and HydraServe) unload model weights when idle and reload them on demand (Zhang et al., 2025; Lou et al., 2025; Fu et al., 2024).
This reduces steady-state GPU memory footprint, but the on-demand reload can introduce cold-start delays (e.g., TTFT spikes) under highly bursty traffic, making it hard to satisfy strict latency SLAs.
These approaches are complementary to Valve and are suitable when bursts are milder or SLOs are less stringent.

Multiplexing.
Several systems multiplex multiple models on one GPU via temporal or spatial sharing (NVIDIA, 2026a; Li et al., 2023; Duan et al., 2024; Xiang et al., 2025; Patke et al., 2024; NVIDIA, 2026b; Ghodrati et al., 2020).
They typically target relaxed or best-effort SLAs: under contention, workloads queue for compute and memory, leading to higher latency.
Valve instead targets online–offline colocation by jointly bounding interference latency and rate.

LLM inference systems.
Prior work improves online LLM serving via scheduling and memory management (Kwon et al., 2023; Agrawal et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2024; Sheng et al., 2024).
These systems focus on optimizing the serving stack (e.g., batching, KV-cache efficiency, and tail-latency control) and are orthogonal to them by providing bounded-interference for online–offline inference colocation.

Cluster scheduling.
Interference-aware CPU schedulers (Verma et al., 2015; Schwarzkopf et al., 2013; Delimitrou and Kozyrakis, 2013; Delimitrou and Kozyrakis, 2014) and ML schedulers (Xiao et al., 2018; Gu et al., 2019; Xiao et al., 2020; Crankshaw et al., 2017; Gujarati et al., 2020; Crankshaw et al., 2020) improve cluster utilization.
Valve is orthogonal by solving new challenges in inference colocation for high utilization.

9 Conclusion

We present Valve, a production-friendly online–offline colocation system that jointly bounds
preemption latency and preemption rate. Valve combines channel-controlled compute
isolation with safe, rate-limited sub-layer memory reclamation, achieving
both low preemption latency and rate. Deployed on 8,054 GPUs, Valve improves average cluster
utilization by 34.6% and saves 2,170 GPUs, while incurring TTFT increase and TPOT
increase across workloads.

References

Agrawal et al. (2023)
A. Agrawal, A. Panwar, J. Mohan, N. Kwatra, B. S. Gulavani, and R. Ramjee

SARATHI: efficient llm inference by piggybacking decodes with chunked prefills.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.16369.

Cited by: §8.

Anthropic (2023)
Anthropic

Introducing Claude.

Note: https://www.anthropic.com/index/introducing-claude

Cited by: §1.

Crankshaw et al. (2020)
D. Crankshaw, G. Sela, X. Mo, C. Zumar, I. Stoica, J. Gonzalez, and A. Tumanov

InferLine: latency-aware provisioning and scaling for prediction serving pipelines.

In ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing,

Cited by: §8.

Crankshaw et al. (2017)
D. Crankshaw, X. Wang, G. Zhou, M. J. Franklin, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica

Clipper: a low-latency online prediction serving system.

In USENIX NSDI,

Cited by: §8.

Delimitrou and Kozyrakis (2013)
C. Delimitrou and C. Kozyrakis

Paragon: qos-aware scheduling for heterogeneous datacenters.

ACM SIGPLAN Notices 48 (4), pp. 77–88.

Cited by: §8.

Delimitrou and Kozyrakis (2014)
C. Delimitrou and C. Kozyrakis

Quasar: resource-efficient and qos-aware cluster management.

ACM Sigplan Notices 49 (4), pp. 127–144.

Cited by: §8.

Duan et al. (2024)
J. Duan, R. Lu, H. Duanmu, X. Li, X. Zhang, D. Lin, I. Stoica, and H. Zhang

Muxserve: flexible spatial-temporal multiplexing for multiple llm serving.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02015.

Cited by: §8.

Fan et al. (2025)
R. Fan, T. Ren, M. Xie, S. Gao, J. Shu, and Y. Lu

gpreempt:gpu Preemptive scheduling made general and efficient.

In 2025 USENIX Annual Technical Conference (USENIX ATC 25),

pp. 263–272.

Cited by: §1,
§1,
§2.3,
§2.3,
§7.2.

Fu et al. (2024)
Y. Fu, L. Xue, Y. Huang, A. Brabete, D. Ustiugov, Y. Patel, and L. Mai

serverlessllm:low-Latency serverless inference for large language models.

In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24),

pp. 135–153.

Cited by: §8.

Ghodrati et al. (2020)
S. Ghodrati, B. H. Ahn, J. K. Kim, S. Kinzer, B. R. Yatham, N. Alla, H. Sharma, M. Alian, E. Ebrahimi, N. S. Kim, et al.

Planaria: dynamic architecture fission for spatial multi-tenant acceleration of deep neural networks.

In IEEE/ACM MICRO,

Cited by: §8.

Gu et al. (2019)
J. Gu, M. Chowdhury, K. G. Shin, Y. Zhu, M. Jeon, J. Qian, H. Liu, and C. Guo

Tiresias: a GPU cluster manager for distributed deep learning.

In USENIX NSDI,

Cited by: §8.

Gujarati et al. (2020)
A. Gujarati, R. Karimi, S. Alzayat, W. Hao, A. Kaufmann, Y. Vigfusson, and J. Mace

Serving dnns like clockwork: performance predictability from the bottom up.

In USENIX OSDI,

Cited by: §8.

Guo et al. (2025)
D. Guo, D. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Song, R. Zhang, R. Xu, Q. Zhu, S. Ma, P. Wang, X. Bi, et al.

Deepseek-r1: incentivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforcement learning.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948.

Cited by: §1.

Han et al. (2022)
M. Han, H. Zhang, R. Chen, and H. Chen

Microsecond-scale preemption for concurrent gpu-accelerated dnn inferences.

In USENIX OSDI,

Cited by: §2.3,
§2.3.

Harris (2017)
M. Harris

CUDA Unified Memory.

Note: https://developer.nvidia.com/blog/unified-memory-cuda-beginners/

Cited by: §1,
§2.3,
§7.2.

Jain et al. (2024)
N. Jain, K. Han, A. Gu, W. Li, F. Yan, T. Zhang, S. Wang, A. Solar-Lezama, K. Sen, and I. Stoica

Livecodebench: holistic and contamination free evaluation of large language models for code.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07974.

Cited by: §1.

Jimenez et al. (2023)
C. E. Jimenez, J. Yang, A. Wettig, S. Yao, K. Pei, O. Press, and K. Narasimhan

Swe-bench: can language models resolve real-world github issues?.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.06770.

Cited by: §1.

Kwon et al. (2023)
W. Kwon, Z. Li, S. Zhuang, Y. Sheng, L. Zheng, C. H. Yu, J. Gonzalez, H. Zhang, and I. Stoica

Efficient memory management for large language model serving with pagedattention.

In ACM SOSP,

Cited by: §8.

Lai et al. (2023)
Y. Lai, C. Li, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, R. Zhong, L. Zettlemoyer, W. Yih, D. Fried, S. Wang, and T. Yu

DS-1000: a natural and reliable benchmark for data science code generation.

In International Conference on Machine Learning,

pp. 18319–18345.

Cited by: §1.

Lee et al. (2023)
H. Lee, S. Phatale, H. Mansoor, T. Mesnard, J. Ferret, K. Lu, C. Bishop, E. Hall, V. Carbune, A. Rastogi, et al.

Rlaif vs. rlhf: scaling reinforcement learning from human feedback with ai feedback.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.00267.

Cited by: §1.

Li et al. (2023)
Z. Li, L. Zheng, Y. Zhong, V. Liu, Y. Sheng, X. Jin, Y. Huang, Z. Chen, H. Zhang, J. E. Gonzalez, et al.

alpaserve: Statistical multiplexing with model parallelism for deep learning serving.

In USENIX OSDI,

Cited by: §8.

Liu et al. (2024)
Z. Liu, F. Fang, X. Feng, X. Du, C. Zhang, N. Wang, Q. Zhao, L. Fan, C. GAN, H. Lin, et al.

Ii-bench: an image implication understanding benchmark for multimodal large language models.

Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37, pp. 46378–46480.

Cited by: §1.

Lou et al. (2025)
C. Lou, S. Qi, C. Jin, D. Nie, H. Yang, X. Liu, and X. Jin

Towards swift serverless llm cold starts with paraserve.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15524.

Cited by: §8.

NVIDIA (2026a)
NVIDIA

CUDA Multi-Process Service.

Note: https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/mps/index.html (accessed 2026-04-09)

Cited by: §8.

NVIDIA (2026b)
NVIDIA

”NVIDIA multi-instance gpu (mig)”.

Note: ”https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/tesla/mig-user-guide/ (accessed 2026-04-09)”

Cited by: §8.

OpenAI (2022)
OpenAI

Introducing ChatGPT.

Note: https://openai.com/blog/chatgpt

Cited by: §1.

Patke et al. (2024)
A. Patke, D. Reddy, S. Jha, H. Qiu, C. Pinto, C. Narayanaswami, Z. Kalbarczyk, and R. Iyer

Queue management for slo-oriented large language model serving.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.00047.

Cited by: §8.

Prabhu et al. (2025)
R. Prabhu, A. Nayak, J. Mohan, R. Ramjee, and A. Panwar

Vattention: dynamic memory management for serving llms without pagedattention.

In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1,

pp. 1133–1150.

Cited by: §2.3,
§2.3,
§3,
§5.

Qiao et al. (2024)
Y. Qiao, S. Anzai, S. Yu, H. Ma, Y. Wang, M. Kim, and H. Xu

Conserve: harvesting gpus for low-latency and high-throughput large language model serving.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.01228.

Cited by: §1,
§1,
§2.3,
§2.3,
§2.3,
§2.3,
§5.

Ruan et al. (2023)
Z. Ruan, S. J. Park, M. K. Aguilera, A. Belay, and M. Schwarzkopf

Nu: achieving microsecond-scale resource fungibility with logical processes.

In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23),

pp. 1409–1427.

Cited by: §1.

Schwarzkopf et al. (2013)
M. Schwarzkopf, A. Konwinski, M. Abd-El-Malek, and J. Wilkes

Omega: flexible, scalable schedulers for large compute clusters.

In EuroSys,

Cited by: §8.

Shen et al. (2025)
W. Shen, M. Han, J. Liu, R. Chen, and H. Chen

xsched: Preemptive scheduling for diverse xpus.

In 19th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 25),

pp. 671–692.

Cited by: §2.3,
§2.3,
§2.3.

Sheng et al. (2024)
Y. Sheng, S. Cao, D. Li, B. Zhu, Z. Li, D. Zhuo, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica

Fairness in serving large language models.

In 18th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 24),

pp. 965–988.

Cited by: §8.

Sun et al. (2024)
B. Sun, Z. Huang, H. Zhao, W. Xiao, X. Zhang, Y. Li, and W. Lin

Llumnix: dynamic scheduling for large language model serving.

In 18th USENIX symposium on operating systems design and implementation (OSDI 24),

pp. 173–191.

Cited by: §8.

Verma et al. (2015)
A. Verma, L. Pedrosa, M. Korupolu, D. Oppenheimer, E. Tune, and J. Wilkes

Large-scale cluster management at Google with Borg.

In EuroSys,

Cited by: §8.

Wu et al. (2023)
B. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z. Bai, X. Liu, and X. Jin

Transparent gpu sharing in container clouds for deep learning workloads.

In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23),

pp. 69–85.

Cited by: §1,
§1,
§2.3,
§2.3,
§7.2.

Wu (2025)
C. Wu

HybridFlow: a flexible and efficient rlhf framework.

EuroSys 2025 (30/03/2025-03/04/2025, Rotterdam).

Cited by: §1.

Xiang et al. (2025)
Y. Xiang, X. Li, K. Qian, Y. Yang, D. Zhu, W. Yu, E. Zhai, X. Liu, X. Jin, and J. Zhou

Aegaeon: effective gpu pooling for concurrent llm serving on the market.

In Proceedings of the ACM SIGOPS 31st Symposium on Operating Systems Principles,

pp. 1030–1045.

Cited by: §1,
§5,
§8.

Xiao et al. (2018)
W. Xiao, R. Bhardwaj, R. Ramjee, M. Sivathanu, N. Kwatra, Z. Han, P. Patel, X. Peng, H. Zhao, Q. Zhang, et al.

Gandiva: introspective cluster scheduling for deep learning.

In USENIX OSDI,

Cited by: §8.

Xiao et al. (2020)
W. Xiao, S. Ren, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, P. Hou, Z. Li, Y. Feng, W. Lin, and Y. Jia

AntMan: dynamic scaling on GPU clusters for deep learning.

In USENIX OSDI,

Cited by: §8.

Xu et al. (2024)
J. Xu, R. Zhang, C. Guo, W. Hu, Z. Liu, F. Wu, Y. Feng, S. Sun, C. Shao, Y. Guo, et al.

Vtensor: flexible virtual tensor management for efficient llm serving.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15309.

Cited by: §2.3,
§2.3.

Yu et al. (2025)
S. Yu, J. Xing, Y. Qiao, M. Ma, Y. Li, Y. Wang, S. Yang, Z. Xie, S. Cao, K. Bao, et al.

Prism: unleashing gpu sharing for cost-efficient multi-llm serving.

arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.04021.

Cited by: §2.3,
§2.3,
§7.2.

Zhang et al. (2025)
D. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Liu, X. Wei, Y. Shan, R. Chen, and H. Chen

blitzscale: Fast and live large model autoscaling with o (1) host caching.

In 19th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 25),

pp. 275–293.

Cited by: §8.

Zhong et al. (2025)
Y. Zhong, Z. Zhang, B. Wu, S. Liu, Y. Chen, C. Wan, H. Hu, L. Xia, R. Ming, Y. Zhu, et al.

Optimizing rlhf training for large language models with stage fusion.

In 22nd USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 25),

pp. 489–503.

Cited by: §1.

Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by

L
A
T
E

xml

.

Instructions for reporting errors

We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:

Click the "Report Issue" () button, located in the page header.

Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.

Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
all.

Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.

We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.

About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)

Major funding support from
