Official exact-v1 https://arxiv.org/html/2602.13197v1 ; bounded decisive core. Routing blocks B denote HTML text block identity, not PDF lines. No experiment/full appendix claim.
B12: Figure 1 : Modular prehensile imitation learning. Human videos are well-suited for learning post-grasp motions but are not suitable for learning grasping for non-anthropomorphic end-effectors. Separating these subtasks via a modular policy design allows for dedicated post-grasp learning. However, existing methods under this paradigm fail to acquire task-compatible grasping skills and are not robust to poor-quality motion data. We propose a simple but effective solution to these issues using simulation-based filtering and a learned grasp scoring model.
B13: In this work, we study the problem of learning robot manipulation policies purely from human videos. We focus on prehensile manipulation tasks – that is, tasks that involve grasping an object. Such tasks can be broken down into two subtasks: 1) finding an appropriate grasp, and then 2) performing an appropriate post-grasp motion to complete the task. For robots with anthropomorphic hands, both behaviors can potentially be learned in a unified manner by retargeting human hand poses Qin et al. (2022) ; Chen et al. (2022) ; Shaw et al. (2023) ; Qiu et al. (2025) . For robots with non-anthropomorphic end-effectors, such as standard parallel-jaw grippers, retargeting is much less effective. Existing works that attempt to learn both subtasks jointly for non-anthropomorphic grippers Wen et al. (2023) ; Bharadhwaj et al. (2024b) ; Xu et al. (2024) ; Bharadhwaj et al. (2024a) have generally resorted to (costly) robot demonstrations to overcome the embodiment gap in grasping. Taking a modular approach, in which the subtasks are separated Ko et al. (2024) ; Yuan et al. (2024) ; Shi et al. (2025) , allows one to offload grasping to existing grasp generators and focus on modeling the post-grasp motions in human videos. This alleviates the reliance on costly robot demonstrations. However, current modular methods ignore the dependencies between the two subtasks and thus fail to ensure their grasping is task-compatible (Fig. 2 ). We propose a modular framework that uses simulation to overcome this hurdle, allowing for robust, sample-efficient learning using only human videos.
B14: We first dive deeper into the grasping subtask of the problem. Learning grasping skills from human videos for arbitrary robot embodiments is challenging due to the embodiment gap. Unless we assume our robot has a human-like hand, it is difficult to derive grasping supervision from human grasping behavior. For this reason, many previous works have abstracted away the grasping aspect of the problem, assuming that it can be handled by external grasp generators Ko et al. (2024) ; Yuan et al. (2024) ; Shi et al. (2025) ; Liang et al. (2024) . We call this the modular policy approach, and we agree that it is promising – modern grasp generators indeed exhibit the ability to find stable grasps on a wide variety of objects. However, in order for a grasp to be successful, it not only needs to be stable, but task-compatible as well. As illustrated in Fig. 2 , many grasps are stable but prohibit the downstream motion to be performed. Achieving robust prehensile manipulation requires selecting grasps that are both stable and task-compatible.
B15: Before we discuss our solution for achieving task-compatible grasping, let’s first discuss the second subtask: learning post-grasp motions from human videos. This has been explored by a variety of recent works Bahl et al. (2023) ; Bharadhwaj et al. (2024a) ; Wen et al. (2023) ; Liang et al. (2024) ; Ko et al. (2024) ; Bharadhwaj et al. (2024b) ; Xu et al. (2024) ; Yuan et al. (2024) ; Ren et al. (2025) . A key insight here is that the success in manipulation largely depends on the motion of objects in the scene. Inducing the same object movement as in a successful demonstration should result in success, regardless of whether the agent is a human or a robot. Thus, if we can extract a representation of object motion from human videos, we can use it as a learning target for a policy model, and then convert the predictions to robot actions at test time. A number of works have used a flow-based representation Ko et al. (2024) ; Bharadhwaj et al. (2024b) ; Xu et al. (2024) ; Yuan et al. (2024) , which can be converted to S ​ E ​ ( 3 ) SE(3) end-effector actions by solving an optimization problem. In this work, we follow the more direct approach of using the 6-DoF object pose , which has also been shown to be promising Lum et al. (2025) ; Hsu et al. (2025) . We experiment with both model-based and model-free methods for extracting 6D pose trajectories. These can be cleanly converted via rigid transformation to end-effector actions given a grasp pose at test time.
B16: Unfortunately, many of these extracted trajectories are actually unsuitable for robot learning. First of all, 6D pose tracking methods may fail and give erroneous trajectories that harm policy performance. Furthermore, even when the tracking is accurate, the motion achieved by the human might not be feasible for the robot , and thus should not be imitated. Therefore, in order to ensure that only the suitable motion data is used for imitation learning, it would be highly desirable to have a way to filter out trajectories.
B17: We now introduce our solution for both trajectory filtering and task-compatible grasping: simulation. Given a set of 6D trajectories extracted from human videos, we pair each trajectory with multiple candidate grasps and execute the grasp-trajectory pairs on a simulated robot to determine which actions are suitable for that robot. Not only does this tell us which trajectories are completely infeasible, it also gives us per-trajectory grasp success labels that provide grasp supervision for our policy model. Specifically, we use simple behavior cloning to train a model that takes in (real) images and outputs both grasp suitability and post-grasp trajectories. At test time, we can leverage existing grasp generators for grasp stability , while employing our learned grasp-scoring model to ensure task-compatibility . This capability has not been achieved in previous works on visual imitation from humans for non-anthropomorphic end-effectors, which either rely on robot data to learn grasping or suffer from task-incompatible grasping.
B18: Our overall framework, named Perceive-Simulate-Imitate (PSI), can teach robots manipulation tasks directly from human videos without any specialized equipment or tools. We evaluate its effectiveness relative to baselines across four manipulation tasks in the real world, considering both model-free and model-based pose tracking pipelines. Importantly, we show that without our simulation-based filtering, noisy trajectory data and task-incompatible grasp selection lead to high failure rates. Besides training new policies from scratch, PSI can also be used to pretrain policies directly on existing hand-object interaction datasets. We show that pretraining with PSI on HOI4D Liu et al. (2022b) enables more sample-efficient learning downstream. We also perform experiments comparing performance across different robot embodiments and motion representations.
B19: Figure 2 : Task-compatibility for grasps. Even though a grasp may be stable, it may not be compatible with the downstream task. With a firm right hand underhand grip on the door handle (right), it becomes very difficult to turn the handle clockwise. Task-agnostic grasp generators fall short in solving this problem, highlighting the need for task-oriented grasping.
B40: The other purpose of the Simulate step is to generate supervision for grasping behavior. Since grasping is highly dependent on end-effector embodiment, it is infeasible for many embodiments to learn grasping by imitating human grasps. However, proper grasping is crucial for robust prehensile manipulation. In order to successfully perform a task, the agent’s grasp needs to be both stable and task-compatible , meaning that it allows the downstream motion to be performed. Many works overlook the task-compatibility requirement, which is highly important in practice. To illustrate this point, consider the case of turning a door handle clockwise with your right hand (Fig. 2 ). Using an overhand grip, the motion is easy to execute. In contrast, a firm underhand grip makes the motion difficult and may require additional body movement to compensate. Proper task-compatible grasping is similarly challenging for robots, which are often even less kinematically flexible than humans.
B41: To address this challenge, we propose to filter grasp-trajectory pairs and use the data to learn a grasp scoring model as well as a trajectory prediction model. For each video, we first compute the initial object center 𝐮 ∈ ℝ 3 \mathbf{u}\in\mathbb{R}^{3} based on the 3D bounding box of the object’s point cloud in the first frame. Next, we sample a set of pre-defined anchor grasps, 𝒢 ^ = { 𝐆 k } k = 0 K \hat{\mathcal{G}}=\{\mathbf{G}_{k}\}_{k=0}^{K} , surrounding the object (visualized in Fig. 4 ). Finally, we execute each 𝐆 k \mathbf{G}_{k} , followed by the corresponding trajectory 𝒯 \mathcal{T} , and use a waypoint controller in a simulator to verify its feasibility. Here, we assume the object becomes rigidly attached to the end-effector when the grasp pose is reached. This is because our goal here is to evaluate task-compatibility without dealing with grasp stability. Accurate simulation of grasp stability would require detailed object information that is generally not feasible to obtain for in-the-wild videos using existing vision methods. At test time, stable grasps will be proposed by an external model and scored based on their nearest anchor grasp (described in Sec. 3.5 ).
B42: After execution, each grasp-trajectory pair is assigned a binary success label. If all K K grasps fail for a given trajectory, we discard the trajectory entirely. In this way, the filtering affects the post-grasp motion learning as well as the grasping. Importantly, the trajectory filtering prevents extreme pose tracking failures from affecting the policy learning. This is a major concern in learning from videos and greatly impacts performance as shown in our experiments.
B43: 3.4 Policy Learning
B44: We train a simple open-loop policy model using the high-quality grasp-trajectory pairs extracted from human demonstration videos and filtered through simulation. The model takes as input an RGB image (from the start of the video) , a binary mask of the target object, and a 2D goal point in pixel coordinates. The 2D goal point serves as a simple but flexible channel for specifying task information ( e.g. , destination for pick-and-place tasks). We use ResNet18 He et al. (2016) to extract features from the RGB image and the binary mask, and then concatenate them and fuse with the goal point via an MLP. Finally, we adopt separate MLP heads to predict the trajectory and grasp scores ( K K grasp success probabilities).
