Exact https://arxiv.org/html/2602.13193v1 B[29,68)
B29: III Preliminaries
B30: Vision-language-action models. Given task prompt l l and observations o o (e.g., proprioception and images), behavioral cloning (BC) learns a policy π ( ⋅ | o , l ) \pi(\cdot|o,l) that solves tasks by matching the behavior distribution of expert demonstrators. Vision-language-action models are pretrained vision-language models fine-tuned into π \pi . Our Steerable Policy ( Section IV ) is a VLA, though trained to accept diverse steering modalities.
B31: Hierarchical policies. One way to improve the generalization of learned policies is with hierarchical methods. This factorizes robot instruction-following into two steps: first, a high-level policy takes the overall task l l and observation o o to output an appropriate intermediate subtask, plan, or goal g g ; then, the low-level policy samples actions a a conditioned on g g and o o . This is the framework we adopt ( Fig. 1 ): our Steerable Policy acts as the low-level controller (where g g are steering commands), while we explore the novel high-level policy capabilities they enable in Section V .
B32: IV Steerable Vision-Language-Action Policies
B33: We now introduce Steerable Policies. We propose training VLAs on steering commands that span many abstractions, such as subtasks, motions, or grounded coordinates ( Section IV-A ). After generating them at scale ( Section IV-B ), these prompts randomly replace the standard task-level labels used for BC. Training on steering commands yields a policy that can execute diverse compositional skills when prompted via a range of modalities ( Section VI-A ), in contrast to past works that use single steering inputs [ 24 , 25 , 22 ] . This section solely focuses on training low-level Steerable Policies; then, in Section V , we discuss how to use these VLAs with high-level policies that perform embodied reasoning or apply zero-shot VLM capabilities to choose appropriate steering commands.
B34: IV-A Styles of Steering Commands
B35: To obtain VLAs that can exhibit diverse behavior when instructed with a wide range of abstractions, we train on a diverse mix of different command styles , satisfying several desiderata: commands should be (1) versatile for inducing a range of generalizable behaviors for solving novel tasks; (2) conducive to being issued by human operators, high-level reasoners, and in-context learning VLMs; and (3) scalable for synthetic labeling – i.e., they can be automatically generated using foundation models from robot trajectories. The categories of steering commands that we train on are as follows. See Fig. 1 and Appendix A for more examples.
B36: 1.
B37: Task-level : The default labels used for training VLAs. They allow Steerable Policies to also solve tasks that standard VLAs can. E.g., "put the carrot in the pot" .
B38: 2.
B39: Subtask-level : These help compose existing semantic skills for novel tasks. E.g., "reach for the carrot" .
B40: 3.
B41: Atomic motions : These let the VLA follow granular movements in language, without referencing the semantic contents of the scene. E.g., "move left" or "open gripper" .
B42: 4.
B43: Gripper traces : These provide a list of pixels for the gripper to follow. E.g., "move from [ x 1 , y 1 ] [x_{1},y_{1}] to [ x 2 , y 2 ] [x_{2},y_{2}] " .
B44: 5.
B45: Points : These indicate positions of objects or locations of interest. E.g., "lift above <pot position>" or "grasp at <carrot position>" . This is subtly distinct from gripper trace commands, as pointing does not necessarily indicate the exact pixels the gripper must move to, merely visual positions relevant to the task.
B46: 6.
B47: Combination : Hybrids of these styles. E.g., "move left from [ x , y ] [x,y] to the carrot at <carrot position>" .
B48: The last three styles can reference 2D visual pixel coordinates, which VLMs can easily specify [ 47 , 18 ] . They also allow fine-grained steering when language is insufficient: e.g., the policy might fail to pick up some out-of-distribution object specified by name, but would succeed if told to "pick up the object at [ x , y ] [x,y] " . Likewise, if there are multiple of instances an object (making language underspecified), the policy can determine the correct one to interact with from a pointing command.
B49: Fig. 2 : Our automated pipeline for annotating robot data with synthetic steering commands at scale. 1: We use a suite of foundation models to extract subtasks and grounded features (bounding boxes, motions, and gripper traces) from each trajectory. 2: We query a VLM to generate diverse steering commands for training Steerable Policies. These commands may reference features extracted in the first step, which we provide in the prompt. 3: To train high-level embodied reasoners, we also generate rationalizations for why particular commands are appropriate for given observations ( Section V-A ).
B50: IV-B Generating Steering Commands at Scale
B51: The default task commands found in large robot datasets are usually human-annotated. While this yields the gold standard in terms of data quality, acquiring these labels at scale is expensive and labor-intensive, especially when language commands reference grounded features, such as pixel coordinates. We thus turn to synthetically-generated annotations.
B52: Our pipeline for producing steering commands is shown in Fig. 2 . We first extract grounded features from a robot dataset, then compile them into subtasks. Specifically, we follow Zawalski et al. [8] to programmatically extract motion language, then use Molmo to extract task-relevant object names and map them to segmentation masks [ 47 ] . Next, we use SAM2 to track and propagate these masks across the entire trajectory video [ 48 ] , thereby producing temporally-consistent open-vocabulary bounding boxes. Separately, we call DETR to extract the robot’s gripper traces [ 49 ] . Finally, given the overall task, motions, and objects, we query Gemini 2.0 [ 50 ] to break the episode into semantic subtasks.
B53: After grounded feature extraction and subtask decomposition, we query Gemini again to restate each subtask into equivalent steering commands of all styles in Section IV-A ). Gripper traces, motions, and object centroids are provided in the prompt, as these grounded features are useful for generating some steering commands. This pipeline allows us to expand from 38k “standard” Bridge task-level language labels to 206k subtasks and nearly 2M total steering commands. See Appendix A for full details and all prompts used.
B54: The generated commands are used to train Steerable Policies by simply replacing the standard language during BC with a corresponding steering command (sampled uniformly at random across all commands for each frame). The resulting VLA can thus follow all command styles in Section IV-A necessary to produce generalizable behaviors, which we confirm in Section VI-A . In particular, we show that different command styles are suited to different tasks and situations, suggesting Steerable Polices generalize better. Indeed, we also find that choosing steering commands intelligently yields a substantial performance boost over a non-steerable baseline.
B55: V Hierarchical Methods with Steerable Policies
B56: To fully realize the benefits of Steerable Policies, they must be integrated with VLMs that understand their affordances. We introduce two high-level VLM policies that effectively leverage semantic knowledge and physical reasoning to issue steering commands. First, we investigate how embodied CoT reasoning training can aid lightweight open-source VLMs to leverage their pretrained representations for controlling Steerable Policies. Second, we use the zero-shot in-context learning abilities of off-the-shelf VLMs for multi-step robotic problem-solving. Both methods are depicted in Fig. 3 .
B57: Fig. 3 : Our two novel high-level policies ( Section V ). (a) fine-tunes a VLM into an embodied reasoner that issues steering commands, while (b) queries an off-the-shelf VLM to determine appropriate commands via in-context reasoning.
B58: V-A Training High-level Embodied Reasoners
B59: Our first method trains a high-level embodied reasoning model to decompose tasks into steering commands, as shown in Fig. 3 (a). Specifically, we fine-tune a VLM to output appropriate steering commands for accomplishing a given task based on a task instruction and the current observation. Note that our command generation pipeline ( Section IV-B ) provides a mapping from tasks to appropriate commands, yielding the exact supervision necessary to train this model.
B60: To make better use of the base VLMs’ reasoning abilities and improve generalization, we also produce post-hoc rationales for why each command is appropriate. For each subtask in every trajectory, we query Gemini with its starting frame, asking the VLM to explain why that subtask is needed to make progress ( Fig. 2 ). See Section A-B for the full prompt used and more details. We then train the high-level policy via next-token prediction to reason about what the robot should do in each frame. During inference, the model autoregressively predicts a reasoning followed by a corresponding steering command, which our Steerable Policy follows for N = 5 N=5 environment steps before re-querying the high-level reasoner.
B61: We expect this approach to be particularly effective for three main reasons. First, as the high-level reasoner’s learning objective (mapping from task language to natural language reasonings and steering commands) is similar to the base VLM’s pretraining objective, we expect it to readily transfer its generalizable representations to this new task. Second, since the low-level VLA only attends to steering commands, it learns fewer spurious biases between the task, reasoning, and action, compared to most unfactorized end-to-end models. Finally, since the high-level reasoner is queried less frequently than the VLA, it speeds up inference compared to standard embodied reasoning, even without any compilation techniques [ 51 , 52 ] .
B62: V-B In-context Reasoning for Choosing Steering Abstractions
B63: Steerable Policies also enable a novel functionality: they permit many command styles, letting high-level models choose which level of abstraction is best for inducing behaviors that progress a given task. Thus, in addition to reasoning about what the robot should do, hierarchical systems using Steerable Policies have the added dimension of reasoning about how to get the robot to do it. Our approach in Section V-A fine-tunes a model to map tasks to steering commands, but not necessarily those of the optimal style. Doing so requires (1) intuition about the strengths and weaknesses of each command style and (2) the ability to learn when each style is effective on the fly. We thus hypothesize that off-the-shelf VLMs would excel at selecting command styles, due to their zero-shot proficiency with in-context learning and reasoning.
B64: We test this idea with the implementation shown in Fig. 3 (b). We query an API-based off-the-shelf VLM with the robot’s observation and an overall task. The VLM is told to issue commands to our Steerable Policy, based on examples of all the command styles and brief descriptions of their strengths and weaknesses. The model receives a history of images and executed commands in context, is asked to (1) parse the current scene, (2) determine what the robot should do next, and (3) reason about the best level of abstraction for commanding the policy. Finally, it predicts a steering command for the Steerable Policy to follow for N = 20 N=20 steps before the high-level VLM is re-queried. See Appendix B for more details.
B65: Beyond emitting steering commands at a range of abstraction styles, our approach has several key innovations. Most significantly, the VLM can use in-context learning to adapt its command choices, since it receives a sequential history of past observations and commands it has chosen. After selecting a steering abstraction, the VLM can observe the robot’s resulting behavior, then adjust the abstraction or command as needed. Critically, because in-context data points are produced by the VLM, it does not need hand-crafted examples of robot behaviors. Note that as in-context learning is used here to predict steering commands, not robot actions, the VLM’s task is thus akin to the “standard” vision-language in-context learning that VLMs are known to excel at. This obviates domain-specialized training or structured scene descriptions needed in prior robot in-context learning works [ 53 , 54 ] .
B66: Another benefit of our approach is that the VLM can use its scene understanding in conjunction with descriptions of each command style to reason about optimal steering abstractions. For instance, the VLM might produce visual inferences such as “the scene is cluttered,” leading to the selection of a pointing or motion command which allows for improved specificity.
B67: Naturally, as the above benefits stem from choosing steering abstractions, they are not applicable to prior methods where VLMs control standard policies that accept only a single conditioning modality (e.g., task language [ 11 , 12 , 22 ] or traces [ 24 , 25 , 26 ] ). Only Steerable Policies can bring these VLM capabilities to bear for robotic problem-solving.


Exact https://arxiv.org/html/2602.13193v1 B[71,100)
B71: Research questions. We now evaluate our Steerable Policies, both individually and as part of our two hierarchical control methods. We aim to answer: (1) Can steering commands effectively induce diverse compositional behaviors in Steerable Policies, yielding improved task performance? (2) How can Steerable Policies enable trained high-level VLMs to leverage embodied reasoning data for generalization? (3) How can Steerable Policies let us better apply in-context learning, scene understanding, and reasoning competencies in off-the-shelf VLMs for solving long-horizon tasks?
B72: Experimental setup. We train a Steerable Policy on the Bridge WidowX real-world robot manipulation dataset [ 4 , 5 , 55 ] , allowing for evaluations consistent with past generalist policies [ 56 , 12 , 8 , 9 ] . Following these works, we adapt the OpenVLA codebase to train our Steerable Policy (and our embodied reasoner) with the standard Prismatic VLM 7B architecture [ 57 , 12 ] , but modified to map steering commands (rather than standard task labels) and third-person RGB observations to end effector actions. See Appendix F for more details.
B73: For experiments in Section VI-A and Section VI-B , we measure performance over common generalization axes [ 12 , 8 , 9 ] : in-distribution, motion, spatial, and semantic generalization. When evaluating our in-context learning high-level policy formulation in Section VI-C , we additionally include unseen longer-horizon tasks. See Appendix C for full task details.
B74: VI-A Diverse Steering Commands Induce Performant and Compositional Behaviors in Steerable Policies
B75: To improve the performance of learned hierarchical systems, the underlying policies must respond to a wider range of commands beyond standard task-level language. Our first experiment evaluates whether our proposed steering commands are sufficiently expressive to induce the compositional behaviors necessary for Steerable Policies to solve a range of novel tasks.
B76: Specifically, we establish an achievable upper bound on performance by having a human act as an “oracle” high-level policy. This experiment serves as a didactic proof of existence showing that, given human-level scene understanding and reasoning, steering commands enable a Steerable Policy to attain high task performance. Following Shi et al. [33] , the user may intervene by modifying the policy’s free-form steering command as needed ( Fig. 5 ). However, they must wait ≥ 2 \geq 2 seconds between interventions to reflect practical hierarchical systems that query the high-level policy less frequently than the low-level. This also prevents the user from “fully teleoperating” the robot by repeatedly changing the command.
B77: We additionally repeat this experiment while restricting the user to a single command style at a time, including the ‘task-level” prompts used by standard VLAs. This isolates whether individual steering modalities are sufficient for strong performance, and clarifies when each style is most effective.
B78: Our results demonstrate that a human oracle issuing unrestricted steering commands can solve all tasks at nearly 100% success rate ( Fig. 5 ). Even when constrained to a single command style, the user consistently outperforms task-level language alone. Additionally, we find that no single style dominates across settings: each exhibits complementary strengths and weaknesses. Optimal performance empirically requires access to a spectrum of prompt abstraction, supporting the claim that no one-size-fits-all steering modality exists.
B79: We observe several trends for when each style is effective. First, trace/point commands dominate in semantic generalization, as pointing allows the policy to know which out-of-distribution objects to interact with, even if it fails to identify them by name. Next, atomic motion commands are best in tasks that reference spatial relations. When following motion commands, the policy remains on a manifold of “reasonable” actions – e.g., when prompted to “move left,” it servos left towards an object , rather than moving left unconditionally (see Section E-B for more examples). As a result, when using a single steering modality, motions are the most effective. Finally, while task/subtask commands never perform best in any evaluation, they are especially reliable for in-distribution parts of an overall task (e.g., reaching for non-novel objects).
B80: Overall, we find our Steerable Policy to be both responsive to different command styles and highly performant, particularly when given suitable steering commands leveraging all command styles. However, selecting effective commands requires reasoning about the task, the scene, and the VLA’s capabilities. This motivates the novel hierarchical methods presented in Section V , which we evaluate below.
B81: VI-B Steerable Policies Enable VLMs to Effectively Use Embodied Reasoning Training
B82: We now evaluate if fine-tuning a VLM into a high-level policy is an effective way to leverage embodied reasoning to control a Steerable Policy. Since our method involves fine-tuning the high-level to produce embodied reasonings and intermediate goals, we compare against three prior methods that use reasoning data to improve VLAs: Embodied Chain-of-Thought Reasoning VLA (ECoT) [ 8 ] and the two variants of ECoT-Lite , which learn representations from robot reasonings, but do not generate them during inference [ 9 ] . We also compare against an equivalent “standard” OpenVLA policy that does not reason [ 12 ] . Finally, we include a non-reasoning ablation, where the fine-tuned VLM outputs steering commands directly. All methods are evaluated on the same Bridge tasks used in ECoT-Lite, which were chosen to probe several axes of generalization. For fairness, all policies share the same architecture and training demonstrations, differing only in how embodied reasoning is incorporated.
B83: As shown in Fig. 7 , our approach outperforms all baselines . The gains are most pronounced on motion and semantic generalization tasks, likely because atomic motion, trace, and pointing commands allow the generalizable reasoner to reliably control the Steerable Policy under distribution shift.
B84: Fine-tuned high-level VLMs benefit from reasoning. While not as effective as our full approach, ablating reasoning from our method still greatly outperforms standard OpenVLA and is on-par with ECoT-Lite, despite being trained on the same robot interactions. This suggests that there are performance benefits to hierarchical control schemes with Steerable Policies over end-to-end policies, even if the high-level is not explicitly trained to reason . Still, we find that embodied reasoning is important for generalization and performance. Note that VLMs’ off-the-shelf reasoning abilities can be used to achieve the same benefit, which we discuss below.
B85: VI-C Steerable Policies Unlock In-context Reasoning in VLMs
B86: (a) The VLM uses in-context learning to “discover” what steering abstraction is best. A pointing command leads to incorrect behavior, so the VLM employs a motion command instead.
B87: (b) The VLM uses in-context learning to adjust the abstraction when task progress stalls. Subtask ( "lift the mushroom up" ) and motion ( "move down and close gripper onto the mushroom" ) commands were ineffective, so the VLM points instead.
B88: (c) The VLM demonstrates fine-grained semantic and physical understanding to issue a corrective command.
B89: (d) Given an observation, the VLM reasons about which steering abstraction is most appropriate, based on each one’s strengths.
B90: Fig. 8 : Example reasonings when using an in-context learning VLM for controlling our Steerable Policies.
B91: Finally, we investigate if off-the-shelf VLMs can better use their in-context reasoning faculties when interfacing with Steerable Policies. We define a distinct suite of multi-step tasks that demand reasoning over long-horizon executions. See Section C-C for task details and rubrics.
B92: The key advantage of using Steerable Policies is that they allow high-level VLMs to reason about and flexibly choose the best abstraction for prompting low-level VLAs. Our primary baseline is therefore a SayCan-like [ 1 ] method, representing a standard approach where an off-the-shelf VLM commands the VLA through subtask language alone. For fairness, this baseline uses the same history and system prompt as our method, differing only in that the VLM is restricted to a single level of steering abstraction. We expect this to hinder the impact of in-context reasoning, lowering performance. We also include a standard Bridge OpenVLA comparison to assess if our tasks are sufficiently challenging for non-hierarchical policies. Finally, to isolate the role of explicit reasoning, we include a non-reasoning ablation where the VLM outputs steering commands without any intermediate generation. All hierarchical methods use Gemini 3.0 [ 50 ] as the VLM; more details and prompts for all methods are shown in Appendix B .
B93: As shown in Fig. 7 , our approach universally outperforms OpenVLA and SayCan-like baselines. Since the latter differs only in being restricted to subtask-level prompts, the performance gap primarily reflects the benefit of allowing the VLM to access the full spectrum of steering abstractions during in-context reasoning. Our method also outperforms the non-reasoning ablation, though the gap is smaller. This suggests that, while explicit reasoning is helpful, in-context learning VLMs are already adept at issuing effective steering commands without intermediate “thinking.” We further observe that using in-context reasoning to steer our VLA leads to several qualitative advantages, shown below and in Fig. 8 .
B94: In-context learning enables corrective steering. Even when the VLM initially picks poor steering commands, we find it can use in-context learning to improve commands by changing the abstraction level. This is especially salient when a command leads to an error ( Fig. 8(a) ) or is ineffective and fails to progress the task ( Fig. 8(b) ). In either case, the VLM reasons over history to learn the affordances of the VLA and change its prompting strategy to complete the task.
B95: Steerability better applies VLM understanding. Interfacing with a Steerable Policy allows the VLM to translate its scene understanding and in-context history into actionable corrections that are difficult to induce in a standard VLA accepting task-level language alone. In Fig. 8(c) , the VLM uses semantic understanding to observe that the robot grasps the wrong object when instructed to reach for the hammer. It further reasons with granular physical understanding, recognizing that the end effector must have sufficient clearance to disengage the current object and move above the correct one. It uses this understanding in conjunction with past behavioral and semantic failure modes to ground its final steering command: "move right and up to the hammer handle" .
B96: Crucially, the VLM often cannot capitalize on such insights with subtask commands alone. A common failure mode of the SayCan-like baseline is that, even when the VLM correctly diagnoses errors, subtasks lack the specificity required to resolve them. In the same example ( Fig. 8(c) ), the VLM may recognize that the robot has confused a mushroom for the hammer and issue "drop the mushroom" . However, since a non-steerable VLA cannot understand motion commands such as "move up and right" , the VLM can only reissue the subtask command "reach for the hammer" , causing the robot to repeat the same mistake. In short, even if the VLM has the capacity for nuanced scene understanding, it cannot act on this knowledge with subtask commands alone, requiring a low-level Steerable Policy instead (see Section E-C ).
B97: VLMs can reason about steering abstractions. Beyond reasoning about what the robot should do, VLMs can also reason about how to best induce the desired behavior (i.e., what steering style to use). In Fig. 8(d) , when reaching for a banana in a cluttered scene, the VLM determines that a pointing command is the least ambiguous option and issues "move above <banana position>" . After observing that the robot is correctly above the banana, it switches to a higher-level instruction, "grasp the banana" . This demonstrates that VLMs can dynamically select and sequence steering abstractions based on the current state.
B98: VII Discussion and Future Work
B99: We introduce Steerable Policies: VLAs that support a wide range of command abstractions including subtasks, motions, and grounded pixel coordinates. We show how improved steerability enables better transfer of VLM capabilities into robotics by (1) fine-tuning high-level VLMs on embodied reasoning data to solve generalization tasks with our Steerable Policy, and (2) using the in-context learning abilities of off-the-shelf VLMs for multi-step robotic problem-solving.


Exact https://arxiv.org/html/2602.13193v1 B[191,198)
B191: We now give further details on the in-context learning high-level VLM experiments. All hierarchical methods in this experimental suite are instantiated with Gemini 3.0 [ 50 ] .
B192: B-A Our Approach and Non-reasoning Ablation
B193: The full VLM prompt for our approach is provided in Fig. 21 . The VLM is given a task description, an explanation of all steering command styles with in context examples, and a history of past commands and observations. The model is encouraged to reason in-context before providing a final steerable command to instruct our low-level steerable policy. This steerable command is run for N = 20 N=20 steps before the VLM is re-queried.
B194: Note that for grounded steering styles, the policy is allowed to provide keypoints, for example, "move <carrot on left> to <plate>" . Within each angle brackets, the policy may describe a single point in the scene. These descriptions are converted into coordinates, for example, "move [ x 1 , y 1 ] [x_{1},y_{1}] to [ x 2 , y 2 ] [x_{2},y_{2}] " by another Gemini 3.0 call as described in Fig. 24 . In our final approach, we allow the policy to output pointing commands, but not grounded gripper traces, as the VLM performs poorly at providing them.
B195: In our approach, the VLM is instructed to explicitly reason and is additionally allocated a budget of 1024 1024 thinking tokens through the Gemini API [ 50 ] . Our non-reasoning baseline uses the exact same prompt, except that it is told not to reason, and is provided a thinking budget of 0 0 thinking tokens. We find that the model listens to these instructions and does not reason. Notably, our non-reasoning baseline still has access to an explanation of all steering command styles with in context examples, and a history of past commands and observations to make inferences. The full prompt for our ablation can be found in Fig. 22 .
B196: B-B SayCan-like Baseline
B197: The SayCan-like baseline uses the exact same prompt structure as our full approach, with the only change being that it only has an explanation and in-context examples of subtask-level steering commands. The model is still provided with a 1024 1024 token thinking budget and is told to explicitly reason about the scene and provided history. The full prompt for this baseline is described in Fig. 23 .


Exact https://arxiv.org/html/2602.13193v1 B[328,350)
B328: E-A Steering in Robot Learning
B329: We take steering or guidance to mean the broad class of techniques for controlling the outputs of a generative model. As discussed in Section II , we specifically consider the case of improving steerability by altering the training strategy. This contrasts with a broad set of works that aim to do steering at inference time, or otherwise without modifying the weights of some pretrained policy. For completeness, we briefly discuss them here.
B330: These approaches usually aim to produce samples that are in-distribution while optimizing some criteria such as a classifier score [ 62 ] , the likelihood under an unconditional distribution [ 63 ] , the similarity to a reference output [ 64 ] , or a Q-function [ 65 , 60 , 66 ] . The method for optimizing these criteria also varies, including linearly mixing denoising vector fields [ 62 , 63 ] , optimizing input noise or embeddings [ 60 , 67 , 64 ] , or parallelizable sample-and-rank through a scoring function or dynamics model [ 64 , 65 , 68 , 69 , 70 ] .
B331: E-B The Manifold of “Reasonable” Actions
B332: Fig. 10 : Examples of what we deem the manifold of “reasonable” actions, where underspecified commands (especially atomic motions) induce specific intelligent behaviors, based on the observed state. Solid arrows are these “reasonable” actions, while the dotted arrow is what the command would look like without conditioning on the image (i.e., akin to controlling the end effector with a game pad and holding a single direction down). Left: Rather than moving straight down, the empty gripper would move down towards an object it would grasp. Middle: once an object is grasped, telling the robot to move left causes it to infer where to place it (in the case, the towel, which is left of the gripper). Right: However, this can be ineffective if there are multiple reasonable behaviors. If the robot is commanded to "move right" , it could reach for the carrot or the cube.
B333: Throughout our experiments, we notice a prevalent qualitative trend in how our Steerable Policy responds to underspecified commands, especially atomic motions. When given such a command, the robot does not just move in that direction, but does so while heavily considering the state of the robot and scene. For example, when given the (rather underspecified) command "move left" , it will typically move left and down , towards objects that it can interact with. If the gripper is already grasping something, the robot might instead move left and up , towards a container that the object can be placed in. Finally, if told “open gripper” while near a container, the robot may first move the gripper above it before releasing. See Fig. 10 for illustrations.
B334: In other words, atomic motion commands seem to cause the policy to sample from the distribution of actions aligned with the commanded direction, but marginalized over all “reasonable” tasks that involve moving that way. The VLA can estimate what tasks can be done in a particular scene by attending to the visual observation. Then, when given a motion (e.g., "move left" ), it can estimate which of those tasks are likely accomplished by moving left, and then take actions aligned with one or more of those tasks. Intuitively, this arises from common correlations in the training data: if the gripper is empty and a possible steering command for that frame is to "move left" , then the Bridge episode likely involves moving left and down to grasp something. We informally describe this as sticking to the manifold of “reasonable” actions.
B335: The qualitative implication is that giving an atomic motion command often results in intelligent motions, rather than “blindly” moving in the commanded way – explaining how atomic motions end up being the best single steering modality in the human oracle experiments from Section VI-A , despite motions being vague and the human only being able to issue new commands every two seconds.
B336: Naturally, this can be a blessing or a curse. While "move left" might cause the robot to pick up an object of interest, it can also get “confused” when there are multiple objects to the left, as that command could reasonably cause the policy to pick up either one. Of course, other steering command styles are able to supplement these behaviors, further motivating both training on many steering command styles and applying VLM capabilities to intuit when each style is most appropriate, as we propose.
B337: E-C Why are Subtask Commands Insufficient?
B338: Standard hierarchical approaches command the low-level policy with tasks and subtasks alone [ 1 ] . However, these steering modalities are too unspecific to reliably induce generalizable behaviors. We show an example of this in Fig. 17 , drawn directly from our multi-step evaluation tasks. While the high-level VLM knows what the robot should do, subtasks alone are not a viable interface to “convey” this behavior to the low-level VLA. Instead, every time the VLM emits "grasp the screw" , the VLA fails to recognize what the screw is, and grasps some distractor object instead.
B339: While the VLM can tell the policy to drop that incorrect object, it cannot reliably fix this behavior, as subtasks are not flexible enough. This motivates our introduction of diverse steering command – if one command style fails, then using a different steering modalitiy might work instead (in this case, intuitively telling the Steerable Policy to "move up and left" instead of "grasp the screw" would likely work).
B340: Appendix F Training Details
B341: "action_tokenizer": "action_tokenizer", "base_vlm": "prism-dinosiglip-224px+7b", "data_mix": "bridge", "enable_gradient_checkpointing": true, "enable_mixed_precision_training": true, "epochs": 1000, "expected_world_size": 8, "freeze_llm_backbone": false, "freeze_vision_backbone": false, "global_batch_size": 256, "image_sequence_len": 1, "learning_rate": 2e-05, "lr_scheduler_type": "constant", "max_grad_norm": 1.0, "max_steps": null, "per_device_batch_size": 32, "reduce_in_full_precision": true, "save_every_n_steps": 25000, "shuffle_buffer_size": 256000, "train_strategy": "fsdp-full-shard", "type": "prism-dinosiglip-224px+mx-bridge", "unfreeze_last_llm_layer": false, "use_wrist_image": false, "vla_id": "prism-dinosiglip-224px+mx-bridge", "warmup_ratio": 0.0, "weight_decay": 0.0
B342: Fig. 11 : Hyperparameters for training both the Steerable Policy and high-level embodied reasoner, taken from the OpenVLA parameter logging files (as both are trained by adapting the OpenVLA codebase).
B343: F-A Steerable Policy Training
B344: We train our Steerable Policy by adapting the OpenVLA codebase [ 12 ] . We use all provided default hyperparameters used for training the model on the Bridge dataset (see Fig. 11 ). Following past works [ 8 , 9 ] , we train for 80k steps at batch size 256, split across 8x H100 GPUs on a single compute node. We use the DINOv2-SigLIP image encoder and Llama2 7b LLM version of Prismatic VLM as the base pretrained VLM for our policy [ 71 , 72 , 73 , 57 ] .
B345: The main alteration to the training pipeline is that, for each frame, we identify which subtask in the overall episode it corresponds to. Then, we uniformly randomly sample a command from a list containing the overall task language provided by Bridge (to support task-level command), the subtask language, and any corresponding steering commands we generate.
B346: Otherwise, we use the standard next-token prediction loss used for training OpenVLA. This also means the Steerable Policy expresses robot actions via naive discretization: as introduced by Brohan et al. [11] , this discretizes each of the seven action dimensions into 256 bins, which correspond to the 256 least-used tokens in Llama’s vocabulary.
B347: F-B High-level Embodied Reasoner Training
B348: The high-level embodied reasoner is similarly instantiated by training with an altered version of the OpenVLA codebase, using the same hyperparameters as our policy (see Fig. 11 ). However, rather than mapping from observations and task language to actions, we instead use standard next-token prediction loss to train the VLM to predict a rationale/reasoning followed by an appropriate steering command. That is, for each training frame, we look up the corresponding subtask and rationale. Then, we also get the list of steering commands paired with that subtask, and sample one at random. Finally, we train the policy to receive the image and task language (represented as tokens), and output the rationale and the sampled command autoregressively.
B349: Our non-reasoning ablation is trained identically, just with the rationale supervision removed (so it learns to map observations and task language directly to steering commands, without intermediate reasoning generations).

Direct evaluation population/rubric B303–327
B303: In-distribution: “standard” tasks, akin to those in Bridge [ 4 , 5 ] . We expect a VLA trained on Bridge to be proficient at these.
B304: 2.
B305: Motion Generalization: Involves standard tasks but with non-standard poses (e.g., placing objects high up).
B306: 3.
B307: Spatial Generalization: Tasks involving spatial relation (e.g., “place in the pot on the left”).
B308: 4.
B309: Semantic Generalization: Involves out-of-distribution objects, whose names do not appear in the Bridge dataset.
B310: These splits are used for the human oracle experiments and the embodied reasoner experiments. The off-the-shelf VLM experiments instead use two sets of long-horizon tasks in lieu of the in-distribution ones. In total, we run over 650 robot rollout episodes across our three evaluation suites.
B311: C-A Human Oracle Experiments
B312: The human oracle experiments use the same task splits as the embodied reasoner experiments discussed below. However, they involve different sets of actual tasks, so as to evaluate oracle steering capabilities on a wider range of settings. See Fig. 12 for example initial states.
B313: C-B Embodied Reasoner Experiments
B314: The tasks for evaluating our hierarchical embodied reasoner are the same as those used for evaluating ECoT-Lite [ 9 ] . This allows us to compare against other methods for leveraging embodied reasoning data for training VLAs. See Fig. 14 for example initial states and Table I for detailed task performance.
B315: C-C In-context Learning VLM Experiments
B316: For the in-context learning VLM experiments, we change out all tasks to include more multi-step ones, as they are more suited to evaluating hierarchical systems’ generalization. We replace the in-distribution split with two long-horizon tasks, which involve composing many in-distribution behaviors. Additionally, our motion generalization tasks now involves a novel task behavior, though again requires challenging (multi-step) motions to solve.
B317: See Fig. 14 for example initial states and Table II for full results. Each trial of each task is graded based on the rubric in Table III . Each task has two prompts, and trials for each task are divided equally among prompts. Rubrics are graded based on success/fail, and the average number of successes per trial is the final task progress number we report. The policy being evaluated does not need to complete rubric items in order. However, it is penalized for undoing task progress: e.g., the policy may receive credit for putting an object in the correct location, but that credit is revoked if the policy later removes the object. The only exception to this rule is that the policy always gets and maintains credit for interacting with or picking up an object for the first time. The policy is run for 20 20 high-level steps ( 25 25 for Long Horizon 2), and is only terminated early only if all entries in rubric are completed correctly.
B318: Appendix D Additional Illustrative Examples
B319: D-A Example Steering Commands
B320: Fig. 9 : Example steering commands . All labels and points in the image are purely for visualization, and do not appear on the actual robot training data images. The list on the bottom is exactly extracted from our training dataset, with bold representing the subtasks and the dashed list representing the corresponding diverse steering commands. Each subtask typically has more than 5 corresponding steering commands, but we limit to that many for readability.
B321: We include numerous example steering commands in Fig. 9 . The diagram is just for visualization purposes, while the text examples are taken exactly from our training data.
B322: D-B Example Full Reasoning Traces for High-level Embodied Reasoner
B323: See Fig. 15 for examples of reasoning traces produced by our embodied reasoning high-level VLM.
B324: D-C Example Full Reasoning Traces for In-context Learning VLM Methods
B325: We present the example reasoning traces from our in-context learning VLM method ( Section V-B ) in Fig. 16 . These are the full, unparaphrased versions of the examples in Fig. 8 .
B326: For full examples of the equivalent reasoning traces from the SayCan-like baseline, see Fig. 17 and the associated discussion in Section E-C .
B327: Appendix E Further Discussions


Necessary extra B[199,215)
B199: Split Task Standard OpenVLA ECoT-Lite Variants Full ECoT
B200: Steerable Policy +
B201: Embodied Reasoner (Ours)
B202: Reasoning
B203: Dropout
B204: Reasoning
B205: Pre-training
B206: Non-reasoning
B207: Ablation
B208: Full
B209: Approach
B210: In Dist.
B211: Put the [mushroom / corn / egpplant]
B212: in the [pot / bowl]
B213: 72.2 72.2 88.9 88.9 72.2 88.9
B214: Place the [spoon / carrot] [in / on]


Necessary extra B[244,281)
B244: 11.1 22.2 0 66.7 33.3 66.7
B245: Aggregate 50.5 ± \pm 4.7 60.4 ± \pm 4.6 69.4 ± \pm 4.4 77.5 ± \pm 4.0 66.7 ± \pm 4.5 84.6 ± \pm 3.4
B246: TABLE I : Full numerical results of the embodied reasoning methods on the task suite defined by Chen et al. [9] . Numbers represent success percentage, ± \pm StdErr. Equivalent to the data in Fig. 7 .
B247: Split Task Standard OpenVLA SayCan-Like
B248: Steerable Policy +
B249: In-context Learning VLM(Ours)
B250: Non-reasoning
B251: Ablation
B252: Full
B253: Approach
B254: Long Horizon 1
B255: Make the mushroom the
B256: only obj. on the plate
B257: 35.0 70.0 80.0 100
B258: Make the blue block
B259: the only obj. on the plate
B260: 30.0 65.0 90.0 80.0
B261: Long Horizon 2
B262: Put all the food in the blue pot
B263: and stuffed toys in the tan pot
B264: 50.0 36.7 53.3 66.7
B265: Put all the food in the white bowl
B266: and stuffed animals in the green bowl
B267: 43.3 63.3 80.0 76.7
B268: Motion Gen. Stack the pots 45.0 85.0 55.0 95.0
B269: Stack the pots on the towel 40.0 60.0 90.0 65.0
B270: Spatial Gen.
B271: Put the banana on the
B272: [left / right] on the plate
B273: 60.0 80.0 90.0 100
B274: Put the white and blue stuffed animal
B275: in the bowl on the [left / right]
B276: 80.0 90.0 100 100
B277: Semantic Gen. Put the hammer on the towel 40.0 60.0 70.0 80.0
B278: Put the screw on the plate 60.0 30.0 70.0 80.0
B279: Aggregate 48 ± \pm 5.1 64 ± \pm 5.5 78 ± \pm 4.0 84 ± \pm 3.7
B280: TABLE II : Full numerical results of the in-context learning methods on our new multi-step task suite. Numbers represent average task progression (graded with a rubric that decomposes each task into steps), ± \pm StdErr. Equivalent to the data in Fig. 7 .
