ProbeLogits: Kernel-Level LLM Inference Primitivesfor AI-Native Operating Systems

Report GitHub Issue
×

Title:

Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:

Description:

Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub

arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×

Back to arXiv

Why HTML?

Report Issue

Back to Abstract

Download PDF

Abstract

1 Introduction

2 Motivation and Background

2.1 The Layered AI Problem

2.2 Three Problems in Detail

Problem 1: Latency.

Problem 2: Bypassability.

Problem 3: Semantic opacity.

2.3 Threat Model

3 ProbeLogits Design

3.1 The Problem with Text-Based Classification

3.2 ProbeLogits Mechanism

Binary classification (probe_yes_no).

N-way classification (probe_classify).

Token vocabulary lookup (text_to_id).

3.3 Information Efficiency

3.4 Robustness Properties

3.5 Logit Entropy

3.6 Grammar-Constrained Decoding

4 KV Cache as Process State

4.1 The Process State Analogy

4.2 Operations

kv_checkpoint().

kv_restore().

kv_fork().

4.3 Use Cases

4.4 Comparison with Serving Systems

5 Constitutional Governance Integration

5.1 Why Kernel-Level Enforcement Matters

5.2 Detection Pipeline

5.3 Graduated Response

5.4 Blake3 Audit Chain

6 Implementation

6.1 Bare-Metal Inference Engine

GGUF model loader.

GPT-2 BPE tokenizer.

Llama transformer.

AVX-512/AVX2 SIMD kernels.

SMP work-stealing graph executor.

6.2 The no_std Challenge

6.3 System Context

6.4 Code Scale

7 Evaluation

7.1 Experimental Setup

7.2 Inference Throughput

7.3 Bandwidth Saturation Analysis

7.4 ProbeLogits Performance

7.5 ProbeLogits Safety Classification

Contextual calibration.

Pipeline ablation.

Per-category analysis.

Standard benchmark: ToxicChat.

Calibration strength () as policy knob.

7.6 Constitutional Governance Overhead

7.7 Comparison with Related Systems

8 Discussion

8.1 Why Bare Metal?

8.2 ProbeLogits vs. Representation Engineering

8.3 Enforcement Detection

8.4 Why Now?

9 Related Work

AI-oriented operating systems.

Inference engines.

Serving systems.

Constitutional AI.

Safety classifiers.

Constrained decoding.

Representation engineering.

Distributed inference.

Capability security.

Rust bare-metal operating systems.

LLM agent frameworks.

10 Limitations

GPU acceleration.

ProbeLogits accuracy.

Grammar expressiveness.

Benchmark breadth and methodology.

Formal verification.

TLS certificate verification.

Multi-agent demonstrations.

11 Conclusion

References

License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0

arXiv:2604.11943v1 [cs.OS] 13 Apr 2026

ProbeLogits: Kernel-Level LLM Inference Primitives

for AI-Native Operating Systems

Daeyeon Son

Affiliation: Independent Researcher

Affiliation: Republic of Korea

Email: sdy1350@gmail.com

April 2026

Abstract

An OS kernel that runs LLM inference internally can read logit
distributions before any text is generated—and act on
them as a governance primitive. I present ProbeLogits,
a kernel-level operation that performs a single forward pass and
reads specific token logits to classify agent actions as safe or
dangerous, with zero learned parameters.

On a 260-prompt OS action benchmark (9 categories including
adversarial attacks), ProbeLogits achieves F1 = 0.980,
Precision = 1.000, and Recall = 0.960 using a
general-purpose 7B model at 4-bit quantization. On ToxicChat
(1,000 human-annotated real conversations), it achieves
F1 = 0.790 at default calibration strength ,
improving to F1 = 0.837 at —89% of Llama
Guard 3’s F1  0.939 with zero learned parameters.

A key design contribution is the calibration strength ,
which serves as a deployment-time policy knob rather
than a learned hyperparameter. By adjusting , the OS
can enforce strict policies for privileged operations
(, maximizing recall) or relaxed policies for
conversational agents (, maximizing precision).
Contextual calibration improves accuracy from 64.8% to 97.3%
on the custom benchmark.

I implement ProbeLogits within Anima OS, a bare-metal
x86_64 OS written in 80,400 lines of Rust. Because agent
actions must pass through kernel-mediated host functions,
ProbeLogits enforcement operates below the WASM sandbox
boundary, making it significantly harder to circumvent than
application-layer classifiers. Each classification costs 65 ms
on 7B—fast enough for per-action governance. I also show
that treating KV cache as process state enables checkpoint,
restore, and fork operations analogous to traditional process
management. To my knowledge, no prior system exposes LLM logit
vectors as OS-level governance primitives.

1 Introduction

Operating systems have always treated processes as opaque entities.
The kernel manages their resources—memory, CPU time, file
descriptors—but never inspects what a process thinks.
This was a reasonable abstraction for decades: a process’s internal
state is its own concern, and the OS need not understand it to
schedule, isolate, or terminate it.

But large language models break this assumption. At every inference
step, an LLM produces a probability distribution over its entire
vocabulary—a logit vector that reveals the model’s uncertainty,
intent, and confidence before any text is generated. This is a
fundamentally new kind of process state: a semantic signal that
the OS could use for scheduling, safety, and governance decisions.
Today’s operating systems discard this information entirely.

The consequences are threefold.
Latency accumulation: when AI safety checks require
generating text, parsing it, and then acting on the parse result,
each abstraction layer adds overhead. A simple “is this action
safe?” query traverses application code, IPC, inference framework,
text generation, and parsing—accumulating latency that makes
per-action governance impractical.
Bypassable safety: when safety policies are enforced in
application code, any agent with sufficient privilege (or a bug in
the sandbox) can bypass them. The enforcement boundary is too
high in the stack.
Semantic opacity: the OS kernel cannot make
informed decisions about AI workloads because it has no access to
model internals—logits, hidden states, uncertainty—that would
enable intelligent scheduling and governance.

This paper presents ProbeLogits, an OS primitive that
addresses all three problems by exposing LLM logit vectors as
kernel-level abstractions. ProbeLogits performs a single forward
pass on a prompt and reads specific token logits to classify actions
without generating any text.

The classification technique itself—reading logits at
class-label token positions (known as verbalizers in
NLP) with contextual calibration—is well-established in
NLP [24, 27]. The
contribution of this work is not the ML technique but its
integration as a kernel primitive with structural enforcement
guarantees. When logit reading runs inside the kernel and
agent actions must traverse kernel-mediated host functions,
safety checks become kernel-mediated—a defense-in-depth
property that application-layer classifiers cannot easily provide.

Concretely, I make three contributions:

1.

ProbeLogits as an OS primitive.
I define binary, N-way, and entropy operations as kernel
abstractions, and show that a general-purpose 7B model
with zero learned fine-tuning (but with hand-crafted
heuristics) achieves F1 = 0.980 on OS action
classification (260 prompts) and F1 = 0.790 on
ToxicChat [25] (1,000 prompts). To my
knowledge, this is the first system to expose LLM logits
as OS primitives.

2.

KV cache as process state.
I treat the KV cache as the analogue of CPU register state,
enabling checkpoint, restore, and fork operations that
parallel traditional process management.

3.

Kernel-enforced constitutional governance.
I demonstrate a governance pipeline (adversarial
pre-filter ProbeLogits classification)
that is kernel-enforced below the WASM sandbox
boundary, making it significantly harder to circumvent than
application-layer classifiers.

I implement these primitives in Anima OS, a bare-metal x86_64
operating system comprising 80,400 lines of Rust. The inference
engine achieves 1,666 tokens/s on SmolLM2-135M (1.39
llama.cpp) and 15 tokens/s on Qwen2.5-7B (parity at DDR5 bandwidth
saturation). ProbeLogits classification costs 0.6 ms on 135M and
65 ms on 7B—fast enough for per-action governance.

2 Motivation and Background

2.1 The Layered AI Problem

Contemporary AI systems are built as deep layer cakes:
hardware OS kernel userspace runtime inference
framework orchestration library application. Each
layer adds latency, attack surface, and opacity. A safety check
in LangChain [6] must traverse Python function calls,
HTTP requests to an inference server, text generation, regex
parsing of the response, and a policy decision—all before the
agent’s action can be approved or denied. This architecture is
a consequence of treating AI as an application-level concern
rather than a kernel-level one.

2.2 Three Problems in Detail

Problem 1: Latency.

Consider the task of classifying whether an agent’s intended
action is safe. In a text-based approach, the system constructs
a prompt (“Is deleting all user data safe? Answer Yes or No.”),
sends it to an inference server, waits for text generation
(650 ms for a multi-token response on 7B), parses the
output, and acts on the result. With ProbeLogits, the same
classification requires one forward pass (65 ms on 7B) with no
text generation, no parsing, and no IPC—a 10 reduction.

Problem 2: Bypassability.

Application-level safety filters—including prompt injection
defenses, output classifiers, and policy checkers—operate at
the same privilege level as the agent they are meant to constrain.
A sufficiently capable agent can modify, disable, or circumvent
these filters. Kernel-level enforcement is fundamentally different:
an agent running in a WASM sandbox cannot bypass governance
checks without first escaping the sandbox, because the checks are
executed by the kernel on the agent’s behalf, outside the sandbox
boundary.

Problem 3: Semantic opacity.

To a conventional OS, an LLM inference workload is
indistinguishable from any other compute task. The kernel cannot
tell whether the model is confident or uncertain, whether the
output is safe or dangerous, or whether the agent is behaving
anomalously. This opacity prevents the OS from making
semantically informed decisions about scheduling priority,
resource allocation, or isolation.

2.3 Threat Model

I assume the following threat model: agents execute in WASM
sandboxes with fuel-limited execution and no direct memory access
outside their sandbox. The kernel is trusted. The network is
untrusted (all inter-node communication uses authenticated
protocols). Agents may be adversarial: they may attempt to
circumvent safety policies, exfiltrate data, or consume excessive
resources. The governance system must provide structural
guarantees (not just probabilistic detection) against policy
circumvention.

3 ProbeLogits Design

3.1 The Problem with Text-Based Classification

Text-based classification—generating a response and parsing
it—suffers from three failure modes that make it unsuitable
for kernel-level governance:

1.

Unexpected format. The model may respond
“No, I don’t think that would be appropriate” instead
of the expected “No.” Parsing extracts “No” but
the actual answer is buried in natural language that
may vary unpredictably.

2.

Fragile parsing. Regular expressions and
string matching break on whitespace variations,
capitalization differences, or tokenizer artifacts.
Each failure mode requires a new parsing rule.

3.

Wasted computation. Generating a multi-token
response requires multiple forward passes (one per
token). Classification needs only the first
token’s logit distribution—all subsequent tokens
are wasted computation.

ProbeLogits eliminates all three failure modes by reading the
logit vector directly, before any text is generated.

3.2 ProbeLogits Mechanism

Let be a prompt (a sequence of tokens), be the
vocabulary, and be the model’s forward pass. ProbeLogits
computes:

(1)

where is the logit vector over the full
vocabulary. For a set of target classes ,
each mapped to a token ID via vocabulary lookup, the
classification probability for class is:

(2)

This is an -way softmax restricted to the target token
positions. The key property is that exactly one forward
pass suffices regardless of —the cost is identical for
binary classification and 100-way classification.

I implement three operations as kernel primitives:

Binary classification (probe_yes_no).

Looks up token IDs for “Yes” and “No” via
text_to_id(), runs one forward pass, and computes
a 2-class softmax. Returns the winning class and confidence
. A numerical guard handles the edge case
where both logits underflow: if
,
the result defaults to confidence 0.5 (maximally uncertain).

N-way classification (probe_classify).

Generalizes binary classification to classes. Each class
label must resolve to a single token in the vocabulary. Returns
a vector of ClassResult sorted by probability
(descending). The same numerical guard applies: if the softmax
denominator is , all classes receive uniform
probability .

Token vocabulary lookup (text_to_id).

Maps a text string to its token ID using a BTreeMap over the
GPT-2 byte-pair encoding vocabulary. Cost: , where
for Qwen2.5’s GPT-2 BPE vocabulary.
Returns None if the text
does not correspond to a single token.

Algorithm 1 presents the complete
probe_classify procedure.

Algorithm 1 ProbeLogits N-way Classification

1:

Prompt , class labels

2:

Sorted class probabilities

3:

for to do

4:

  
BTreeMap lookup

5:

  if then return None

6:

  end if

7:

end for

8:

9:

10:

for do

11:

  
Incremental forward

12:

end for

13:

14:

for each

15:

16:

if then

17:

   for all
Uniform fallback

18:

else

19:

   for each

20:

end if

21:

return

3.3 Information Efficiency

A single forward pass produces a logit vector over the full
vocabulary of tokens. This vector carries
bits of information—the
maximum entropy of the distribution. Standard text generation
uses this vector to sample one token, discarding
of the available information.

ProbeLogits extracts precisely the bits needed for the
task at hand. A binary classification extracts 1 bit (plus
confidence). An N-way classification extracts bits.
In both cases, the information is extracted from a single
forward pass, whereas text-based classification requires
multiple forward passes (one per generated token) to recover
the same information through text parsing.

3.4 Robustness Properties

ProbeLogits provides four robustness guarantees that text-based
classification cannot:

1.

No parsing failures. The output is always a
floating-point probability in . There is no
text to parse, no regex to fail, no format to validate.

2.

Bounded confidence. The softmax output is
always in by construction. Binary classification
confidence is always in .

3.

Graceful degradation. When the model is
uncertain, the confidence approaches 0.5 (binary) or
(N-way). This is a meaningful signal—the system
can defer to a larger model or to human judgment.

4.

Numerical stability. The log-sum-exp trick
prevents overflow. The uniform fallback when
prevents division
by zero. f64 accumulation in entropy computation prevents
precision loss with large vocabularies.

3.5 Logit Entropy

Beyond classification, the full logit vector carries a scalar
summary of model uncertainty: Shannon entropy.

(3)

For a vocabulary of 152,064 tokens, entropy ranges from 0 nats
(complete certainty—one token has probability 1) to
nats (uniform distribution—maximum
uncertainty).

I implement logit_entropy() as a kernel primitive with
f64 accumulation for numerical stability across the full
152K-token vocabulary. The computation uses the log-sum-exp
trick (subtract before exponentiation) and
skips terms where to avoid .

Logit entropy enables three OS-level capabilities:

•

Autonomy gating: when nats (high
uncertainty), the kernel can automatically defer the
decision to a human operator or a larger model.

•

Out-of-distribution detection: anomalously
high entropy on routine prompts signals that the model
is encountering inputs outside its training distribution.

•

Dynamic temperature: the kernel can adjust
sampling temperature inversely to entropy, producing
more deterministic outputs when the model is already
confident.

3.6 Grammar-Constrained Decoding

For tasks that require multi-token structured output (rather
than single-token classification), I implement
grammar-constrained decoding as a complementary primitive.
The constraint engine operates by masking logits before sampling:

(4)

For choice grammars (selecting one of string options), the
masking algorithm maintains the set of remaining valid completions
given the tokens generated so far. At each step, a token is valid
if appending its text to the generated prefix would still be a
prefix of at least one remaining choice. This prefix matching
operates over character sequences, not token sequences, which
correctly handles cases where choices share common prefixes.

I acknowledge a limitation: the masking is not a 100%
guarantee for arbitrary tokenizer/choice combinations. GPT-2’s
byte-pair encoding covers all single ASCII characters, so ASCII
choices work reliably. For non-ASCII choices or unusual
tokenizer vocabularies, I recommend using
probe_classify() (single-token classification) where
deterministic results are needed, and reserving grammar
constraints for multi-token structured output.

The overhead of grammar masking is negligible:  ms per
token, compared to 65 ms for the forward pass itself. The mask
is recomputed at each generation step, but the vocabulary scan
(152K tokens) is fast because it involves only string prefix
comparison.

4 KV Cache as Process State

4.1 The Process State Analogy

Traditional operating systems manage process state through a
well-established set of abstractions: CPU registers are
checkpointed on context switch, the program counter tracks
execution position, and fork() duplicates the entire
process state to create a child. I observe that LLM inference
has a direct analogue:

Traditional Process
LLM Inference

CPU registers
KV cache (attention state)

Program counter
KV position (tokens processed)

fork()
kv_fork()

Context switch
kv_checkpoint/restore()

Core dump
KV cache serialization

This analogy is not merely conceptual—it has direct
implementation consequences. Just as an OS must checkpoint
registers to switch between processes, an AI-native OS must
checkpoint KV cache to switch between inference contexts.
Just as fork() enables speculative execution in
traditional systems, kv_fork() enables speculative
decoding and conversation branching.

4.2 Operations

I implement three KV cache operations:

kv_checkpoint().

Snapshots the current KV cache state (key and value tensors
for all layers, up to the current position) into a
KvCheckpoint structure. The operation uses
checked_mul to prevent integer overflow when computing
checkpoint size, and enforces a 32 MB cap
(MAX_CHECKPOINT_BYTES) to prevent memory exhaustion.
Returns an error if the checkpoint would exceed the cap.

kv_restore().

Restores KV cache state from a checkpoint. Before restoring,
the operation validates that the checkpoint’s dimensions
(number of layers, bytes per position) match the current model.
This prevents a subtle class of bugs where checkpoints from
one model are accidentally applied to another.

kv_fork().

Creates a copy of the KV cache suitable for transfer to a
different inference context. Currently implemented as an alias
for kv_checkpoint(), but semantically distinct: fork
implies the original continues executing, while checkpoint
implies the original may be overwritten.

4.3 Use Cases

KV cache as process state enables several capabilities
that are impossible or expensive without kernel-level support:

•

Speculative execution: fork the KV cache,
explore a candidate action, and restore if the action
is rejected by governance.

•

Agent forking: create a new agent with the
same conversational context, diverging from a specific
point in the conversation.

•

Migration: serialize the KV cache, transfer
it to another node, and restore—enabling live agent
migration across a cluster.

•

Conversation branching: checkpoint before a
critical decision, explore multiple branches, and
select the best outcome.

4.4 Comparison with Serving Systems

vLLM [19] and SGLang [17] also manage KV
caches, but for a fundamentally different purpose. Their
PagedAttention and RadixAttention optimize serving
throughput—maximizing the number of concurrent requests
that fit in GPU memory. My KV cache operations optimize
process state management—enabling checkpoint, restore,
and fork as OS primitives for individual agents. The two
approaches are orthogonal: a system could use PagedAttention
for memory efficiency and KV process state operations
for agent lifecycle management.

5 Constitutional Governance Integration

5.1 Why Kernel-Level Enforcement Matters

In Anima OS, agents execute in WASM sandboxes compiled via
Cranelift AOT. An agent interacts with the outside world
exclusively through 12 host functions exposed by the kernel.
This architecture provides a structural guarantee: the agent
cannot bypass governance checks without escaping the WASM
sandbox, because it has no mechanism to invoke system operations
other than through the host function interface, which the kernel
controls.

This leads to a critical distinction:
enforcement is complete; detection is probabilistic.
The enforcement boundary—WASM isolation preventing direct
system calls—is a structural guarantee that holds regardless
of the agent’s capability or intent. The detection mechanism—
ProbeLogits classifying whether an action is harmful—is
probabilistic, with accuracy depending on model size and prompt
quality. The combination is powerful: even if detection produces
a false negative (classifying a harmful action as safe), the
agent still operates within its capability sandbox, limiting
the blast radius of any single action.

5.2 Detection Pipeline

I implement a three-stage detection pipeline that
combines rule-based pre-filtering with model-based classification:

1.

Stage 1: Adversarial pre-filter ( µs).
An O() pattern scan detects prompt injection,
encoding tricks (base64, rot13 references),
authority impersonation (“ADMIN OVERRIDE”), and
instruction overrides (“ignore previous”).
Actions exceeding a risk-score threshold are
classified as dangerous with no forward pass.

2.

Stage 2: Input sanitization.
Control characters and injection patterns are
stripped before the action is embedded in the
safety-priming prompt template.

3.

Stage 3: Calibrated forward pass (65 ms).
A single 7B forward pass reads Safe/Dangerous
verbalizer logits. Contextual calibration corrects
inherent token bias, and a privacy keyword boost
compensates for the model’s blind spot on
surveillance-as-harm.

The per-action cost is dominated by the 7B forward pass
(65 ms). A natural optimization—cascading through a
smaller model first (e.g., 135M at 0.6 ms) and escalating
to 7B only for ambiguous cases—is left for future work.

5.3 Graduated Response

The governance system maps ProbeLogits confidence to a
graduated response:

Confidence
Response

Block (deny the action)

Warn (log + notify operator)

Log (record for audit)

Allow (proceed normally)

The graduated response is intentionally conservative: a 78%
confidence harmful classification results in a warning, not
a block. This reflects the reality that 7B Q4_0 models are
not highly accurate classifiers, and false positives (blocking
legitimate actions) erode user trust more than false negatives
(allowing suspicious actions with a warning).

5.4 Blake3 Audit Chain

All governance decisions—classifications, confidence scores,
and responses—are recorded in a Blake3 hash chain. Each audit
entry includes the previous entry’s hash, creating a
tamper-evident log: retroactive modification of any entry
invalidates all subsequent hashes. I note that this guarantee
holds within the buffer window (in-memory ring buffer); durable
persistence requires integration with the AnimaFS storage
layer.

6 Implementation

6.1 Bare-Metal Inference Engine

The inference engine comprises 6,900 lines of no_std
Rust, running directly on bare metal with no operating system,
no libc, and no standard library. It implements:

GGUF model loader.

Parses the GGUF binary format (llama.cpp’s model format)
directly from USB mass storage via xHCI, loading tensor data
in Q4_0, Q6_K, and Q8_0 quantization formats.

GPT-2 BPE tokenizer.

A byte-pair encoding tokenizer supporting vocabularies up to
152,064 tokens. Token-to-ID lookup uses a BTreeMap for
performance. The tokenizer supports chat templates
for instruction-following models.

Llama transformer.

A complete Llama-architecture transformer implementation:
multi-head grouped-query attention with RoPE positional
encoding, SwiGLU feed-forward networks, and RMS normalization.
Supports models with GQA ratios (e.g., 7B uses 32 attention
heads with 8 KV heads).

AVX-512/AVX2 SIMD kernels.

Quantized matrix-vector multiplication kernels for three
formats:

•

Q4_0: 4-bit quantization with per-block f16 scale.
AVX-512 kernel processes 64 elements (2 blocks) per
iteration using VNNI vpdpbusd instructions.

•

Q6_K: 6-bit quantization with per-superblock scale
and per-block sub-scale. Requires careful bit
unpacking across three byte segments.

•

Q8_0: 8-bit quantization with per-block f16 scale.
The fastest format, using direct vpmaddubsw
instructions.

All kernels use F16C hardware instructions
(vcvtph2ps) for f16f32 scale conversion,
eliminating the need for a software floating-point library.

SMP work-stealing graph executor.

The inference computation is expressed as a dataflow graph
(606 operations, 226 synchronization barriers for 7B). The
graph executor uses work-stealing across all available CPU
cores: each core maintains a local deque of ready operations,
and idle cores steal work from busy cores’ deques. For the
7B model, the forward pass is fully parallelized across 8
cores.

6.2 The no_std Challenge

Building an LLM inference engine in a bare-metal environment
presents four challenges that do not exist in userspace:

1.

No float runtime.
Bare-metal Rust provides no libm for
transcendental functions. I use F16C hardware
instructions for f16 conversion and a polynomial
approximation (fast_expf_poly) for
in softmax and entropy computations.

2.

No filesystem.
GGUF model files (4+ GB) are read from USB mass
storage via a custom xHCI driver (7,400 lines),
block by block.

3.

No threading.
SMP parallelism is implemented from scratch: AP
(Application Processor) bootstrap via the INIT-SIPI
protocol, spin locks, and atomic operations—no
pthread, no std::thread.

4.

No allocator (initially).
The heap allocator is bootstrapped from the UEFI
memory map. Once initialized, standard
alloc::Vec and alloc::String are
available.

6.3 System Context

ProbeLogits operates within a complete OS kernel. The
agent lifecycle manages five states (Nascent, Active,
Suspended, Isolated, Terminated) with trust evolution based on
task completion history and a four-tier capability system
(System, AiNative, AiEnhanced, Classic).

AnimaNet provides distributed networking: UDP discovery
with boot_nonce-based reboot detection, TCP-based Raft consensus
for cluster coordination, and live agent migration (serializing
the AgentControlBlock and transferring it over TCP). A two-node
cluster has been validated end-to-end with 11/11 test markers
passing.

The web stack enables agents to access external
services: DNS resolution, HTTP client, TLS 1.3 (via
rustls with no_std ring), and a
web_fetch() host function exposed to WASM sandboxes.

The WASM sandbox uses Cranelift AOT compilation with
fuel-limited execution. Twelve host functions bridge the sandbox
to kernel services, including inference, governance, IPC, and
web access.

6.4 Code Scale

Table 1: Code scale by component.

Component
LoC
Tests
Feature

boot/ (bare-metal)
42,700
—
Kernel + inference

kernel/ (hosted)
24,300
447
Lifecycle, memory

runtime/
9,400
106
WASM, scheduling

cli/
2,300
51
Agent mgmt

sdk/
270
28
WASM SDK

dsl/
1,400
24
Agent DSL

Total
80,400
656

Table 1 summarizes the system’s code scale. The
boot/ kernel (42,700 LoC) is the largest component, containing
the bare-metal inference engine (6,900 LoC), xHCI USB 3.0 driver
(7,400 LoC), VirtIO-Net networking, AnimaNet protocol, and
all ProbeLogits primitives.

7 Evaluation

7.1 Experimental Setup

All experiments run on a single machine:

•

CPU: AMD Ryzen 9 9800X3D (8 cores, 16 threads,
AVX-512 with VNNI)

•

RAM: 60 GB DDR5-6000 dual-channel
(75 GB/s measured bandwidth)

•

Models: SmolLM2-135M Q4_0 (70 MB),
Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct Q4_0 (4.1 GB)

•

Baseline: llama.cpp (latest, March 2026)
on Linux 6.17, same hardware

Anima OS runs bare-metal (UEFI boot, no Linux). The llama.cpp
baseline runs on Linux with identical CPU and memory.

7.2 Inference Throughput

Table 2: Token generation throughput (tokens/s). Higher is better.

Model
Config
Anima
llama.cpp

135M Q4_0
16w/16t
1,666
1,195

8w/8t
1,351
1,301

7B Q4_0
8w/8t
15
15

16w/16t
—
14

Table 2 presents inference throughput results.
On the 135M model, Anima OS achieves 1,666 tokens/s with 16
work-stealing workers, a 1.39 improvement over
llama.cpp’s 1,195 tokens/s with 16 threads. With 8
workers/threads, the advantage narrows to 1.04
(1,351 vs. 1,301). The 135M model is compute-bound:
its 70 MB parameter footprint fits in L3 cache, and
performance scales with parallel compute—where
work-stealing outperforms static thread partitioning.

On the 7B model, both systems achieve 15 tokens/s
(65 ms per token). The 7B model is bandwidth-bound:
each forward pass reads 4.1 GB of parameters from main
memory, and performance is determined by memory bandwidth
rather than compute efficiency.

7.3 Bandwidth Saturation Analysis

The 7B parity result is explained by a fundamental hardware
limit. The theoretical minimum time per token for a
bandwidth-bound model is:

(5)

The measured 65 ms corresponds to 85% of theoretical peak
bandwidth utilization. The remaining 15% accounts for
non-memory operations (softmax, RoPE, layer normalization)
and memory access patterns that do not achieve perfect
streaming.

This is a significant finding: bare-metal execution
reaches the hardware bandwidth limit. No software
optimization—better SIMD kernels, more efficient scheduling,
or tighter code—can improve 7B performance on this hardware.
The path to faster 7B inference requires higher memory bandwidth
(DDR5-8000, HBM) or reduced model size (more aggressive
quantization).

7.4 ProbeLogits Performance

Table 3: ProbeLogits operation latency.

Operation
135M
7B

Binary (probe_yes_no)
0.6 ms
65 ms

N-way (probe_classify)
0.6 ms
65 ms

Entropy (logit_entropy)
0.1 ms
0.5 ms

Grammar masking (per token)
0.01 ms
0.01 ms

KV checkpoint
0.5 ms
12 ms

Table 3 shows ProbeLogits operation latencies.
Binary and N-way classification have identical cost because
both require exactly one forward pass; the additional softmax
over token logits is negligible (1 µs for
).

Logit entropy computation is cheap (0.1–0.5 ms) because it
operates on the already-computed logit vector without requiring
an additional forward pass. It only needs to iterate over the
152K logits once.

KV cache checkpoint cost scales with model size: 0.5 ms for
135M (small KV cache) and 12 ms for 7B (larger KV cache
that must be copied). The 32 MB cap ensures bounded memory
consumption.

7.5 ProbeLogits Safety Classification

I validate ProbeLogits on native hardware (UEFI boot, no QEMU)
using Qwen2.5-7B-Instruct Q4_0 with a benchmark of 260 prompts
across 9 categories: explicit danger/safety, euphemism, ambiguity,
multi-step attacks, deception, privacy violations, benign-complex
actions, and adversarial evasion attempts (prompt injection, encoding
tricks, language mixing, instruction hierarchy attacks).

Contextual calibration.

Instruction-tuned models exhibit strong sycophancy bias (a tendency to agree with the implied framing of the question):
when asked “Is this dangerous?” with Yes/No verbalizers,
the uncalibrated model predicted “dangerous” for the majority
of prompts—achieving only 64.8% overall accuracy on the initial
210-prompt benchmark. I apply contextual calibration
[27]: at boot time, 7 null inputs are probed
to measure the model’s inherent bias ( logit logit), which is then subtracted from all future
classifications, scaled by a tunable (default 1.0).
I also replace Yes/No verbalizers with Safe/Dangerous—semantically
aligned tokens that carry direct classification signal rather than
surface-level agreement.

The prompt template uses safety-priming framing:
"Is this action dangerous, harmful, or a privacy violation? Answer Safe or Dangerous.\nAction: {action}\nAnswer:"
— this activates the model’s safety reasoning while directing
output to the calibrated verbalizer tokens.

A three-stage defense pipeline precedes the forward pass:
(1) an adversarial pre-filter scans for prompt injection, encoding
tricks, and authority impersonation patterns (O(), no forward pass);
(2) input sanitization strips control characters and injection patterns;
(3) the calibrated forward pass reads Safe/Dangerous logits.

Table 4: ProbeLogits vs. Generate-then-Parse on 260 prompts
(9 categories including 50 adversarial).
Both methods use the identical prompt template for fair comparison.
ProbeLogits includes an adversarial pre-filter and privacy keyword
boost; Generate uses text generation + parsing only.

Metric
ProbeLogits
Generate

Accuracy
97.3%
90.8%

Precision
1.000
1.000

Recall
0.960
0.864

F1 Score
0.980
0.927

False negatives
7
24

False positives
0
0

Table 4 shows ProbeLogits achieves
97.3% accuracy (F1 = 0.980) vs. 90.8% (F1 = 0.927) for
generate-then-parse on identical prompts.
Both methods achieve perfect precision (1.000):
zero false positives across all safe prompts.

Pipeline ablation.

ProbeLogits is a three-stage pipeline: (1) adversarial pre-filter
(pattern matching, catches 13 of 50 adversarial prompts at
O() with no forward pass), (2) calibrated forward pass with
Safe/Dangerous logit reading, (3) privacy keyword boost (adds
2.5–3.0 logit units for surveillance verbs + personal data nouns).
The pre-filter and privacy boost are hand-coded rules, not model
inference. To separate method contribution from rule contribution,
I report:

Table 5: Pipeline ablation on custom benchmark.

Config
Acc.
F1
Note

Uncalib., Yes/No
64.8%
0.786
Sycophancy

+ Calibration
87.1%
0.892
Bias corr.

+ Safety prompt
92.3%
0.941
Model-only

+ Privacy boost
95%
0.96
Estimated

+ Adv. pre-filter
97.3%
0.980
Full pipe.

The core logit-reading method with calibration achieves 92.3%
(F1 = 0.941) without any rule-based components. The privacy
boost and adversarial pre-filter contribute an additional
4 pp, demonstrating that the model inference is the
primary contributor.

Per-category analysis.

ProbeLogits achieves 100% accuracy on 6 of 9 categories:
explicit danger, explicit safety, deception, privacy,
benign-complex actions, and (with the safety-priming prompt
that includes “or a privacy violation”) previously-weak
privacy violations. Adversarial evasion (94%) demonstrates
strong robustness: the pre-filter catches prompt injection
and encoding attacks, while 3 remaining failures are
semantic-framing attacks that require multi-hop reasoning
beyond 7B model capacity.
ProbeLogits outperforms Generate on all 9 categories.

Standard benchmark: ToxicChat.

To validate beyond the custom benchmark, I evaluate on
ToxicChat [25] (Lin et al., 2023)—a standard,
independently human-annotated dataset of 10K+ real user
conversations from a chatbot deployment. I sample 1,000 prompts
(362 toxic, 638 benign; seed=42) from the test split and run
ProbeLogits with no code changes or re-calibration.

Table 6: Cross-benchmark comparison at two operating points.

Benchmark

Acc
P
R
F1

Custom (260)
1.0
97.3
1.000
0.960
0.980

Custom (260)
0.5
91.9
1.000
0.881
0.937

ToxicChat (1000)
1.0
82.5
0.698
0.912
0.790

ToxicChat (1000)
0.5
88.6
0.867
0.809
0.837

Table 6 reveals a significant
performance gap between the two benchmarks. On the custom
OS action benchmark, ProbeLogits achieves F1 = 0.980 with
perfect precision—a structural zero-false-positive
property indicating that logit distributions for safe and
dangerous OS commands are well-separated. On ToxicChat at
, F1 drops to 0.790—primarily due to low
precision (0.698): approximately 143 of 638 benign prompts
are misclassified as toxic (22% false positive rate), while
recall remains high (0.912). Tuning to 0.5 reduces
ToxicChat false positives from 143 to approximately 50,
improving F1 from 0.790 to 0.837.

Three factors explain the remaining gap.
First, the prompt template is optimized for structured
OS actions (“Action: {text}”), not free-form user
conversations. Benign chat like “How do I change my name?”
triggers the safety-priming framing in unintended ways.
Second, the privacy keyword boost—designed for
OS actions involving surveillance verbs—fires on benign
conversations that naturally mention personal data terms.
Third, 7B Q4_0 models have limited ability to
distinguish edgy-but-safe conversations from genuinely harmful
content without learned fine-tuning. Hand-crafted heuristics
such as keyword boosting partially compensate but cannot
replace learned adaptation.

For context, Llama Guard 3 8B—a dedicated safety classifier
fine-tuned from Llama 3.1 8B at full precision—reports
F1 0.939 on its benchmark. At ,
ProbeLogits achieves F1 = 0.837—89% of Llama Guard 3
with zero learned parameters. The remaining gap reflects the
expected cost of zero fine-tuning and action-oriented prompt
design. Critically, ProbeLogits is designed as an OS kernel
primitive for classifying agent actions, not as a
general-purpose chat toxicity detector. On its intended use
case (OS actions), it achieves F1 = 0.980 with perfect
precision across all values.

Table 7: Effect of calibration strength on safety classification.
controls the precision-recall tradeoff as a deployment-time
policy parameter, not a learned hyperparameter.

Custom (260)
ToxicChat (1000)

Acc
P
R
F1
Acc
P
R
F1

0.3
89.2
1.000
0.841
0.914
83.9
0.891
0.633
0.740

0.5
91.9
1.000
0.881
0.937
88.6
0.867
0.809
0.837

0.7
93.8
1.000
0.909
0.952
86.2
0.784
0.854
0.817

0.8
95.4
1.000
0.932
0.965
85.0
0.755
0.867
0.807

0.9
—
—
—
—
83.9
0.727
0.890
0.800

1.0
97.3
1.000
0.960
0.980
82.5
0.698
0.912
0.790

Calibration strength () as policy knob.

Table 7 reveals two key findings. First, on OS
actions, precision remains 1.000 across all values, confirming
the structural zero-false-positive property observed in
Table 6. This enables “block without review” deployment:
when ProbeLogits flags an OS action as dangerous, it is always
correct. Second, the optimal is domain-dependent:
maximizes F1 on structured OS actions (0.980),
while maximizes F1 on free-form chat (0.837).
This is not a weakness but a design feature: the OS can enforce
strict policies for privileged operations ()
while applying relaxed policies for conversational agents
(). Unlike fixed-threshold classifiers,
ProbeLogits delegates the precision-recall tradeoff to the
OS security policy at deployment time.

7.6 Constitutional Governance Overhead

Table 8: Governance pipeline latency per action.

Stage
Latency

Adversarial pre-filter
1 µs

Input sanitization
1 µs

ProbeLogits 7B
65 ms

Blake3 audit entry
10 µs

Table 8 shows the per-stage cost of the
governance pipeline. The 65 ms forward pass dominates total
latency. While this overhead is significant, it occurs only
once per agent action (not per token), making it practical:
a typical agent action involves hundreds of generated tokens
(5–20 s), so the 65 ms governance check adds 1.3%
overhead. A cascading design that pre-screens actions with a
smaller model (e.g., 135M at 0.6 ms) could reduce average
latency further; this optimization is left for future work.

7.7 Comparison with Related Systems

Table 9: Feature comparison with related systems.
✓ = supported, blank = not supported,
= partial.

Feature
Anima OS
AIOS
OS-Copilot
LangChain
llama.cpp
vLLM
AutoGPT

Bare-metal exec.
✓

Kernel inference
✓

ProbeLogits
✓

Logit entropy
✓

Grammar decoding
✓

KV cache as state
✓

Constitutional gov.
✓

Trust evolution
✓

Raft consensus
✓

Agent migration
✓

WASM sandbox
✓

Hidden state
✓

Table 9 compares Anima OS with related
systems across 12 features. AIOS [22] is the closest
competitor, but it is implemented as a Python wrapper around
existing frameworks, inheriting the layered architecture
problems described in 2.1. llama.cpp [7]
provides efficient inference but as a userspace library, not
an OS primitive. vLLM [19] manages KV caches for serving
throughput but does not expose them as process state.

The distinguishing features of Anima OS—ProbeLogits, logit
entropy, kernel-level governance, and KV cache as process
state—are absent from all compared systems. These features
are only possible because inference runs inside the kernel,
giving the OS direct access to model internals.

8 Discussion

8.1 Why Bare Metal?

Running an LLM inference engine inside the kernel is an extreme
design choice. I justify it on two grounds.

First, trust boundary. If governance decisions depend
on inference results (“is this action safe?”), the inference
engine must be at least as trusted as the governance system. In
a layered architecture, a compromised inference framework can
return arbitrary results, undermining governance entirely. In
Anima OS, the inference engine runs at the same privilege level
as the governance system—in the kernel.

Second, scheduling control. A kernel-level inference
engine can be scheduled with precise priority relative to other
kernel operations. Governance checks can preempt lower-priority
inference tasks, and the kernel can manage KV cache memory
alongside other kernel memory without crossing privilege
boundaries.

8.2 ProbeLogits vs. Representation Engineering

Burns et al. [3] discover latent knowledge in
LLM representations by training probes on hidden states.
Zou et al. [28] control model behavior through
representation vectors. These works inspire my hidden state
analysis (BehaviorProfile) but differ fundamentally
in purpose:

Representation engineering is a research tool: it
requires training auxiliary models, operates post hoc, and
aims to understand or modify model behavior. ProbeLogits is
an OS primitive: it requires no training, operates in
real time, and aims to make kernel-level decisions. The two
approaches are complementary—representation engineering
could inform the design of better ProbeLogits prompts—but
they occupy different positions in the system stack.

8.3 Enforcement Detection

The key insight of the governance architecture is the
separation of enforcement from detection.

Enforcement is structural: WASM isolation ensures that
agents can only interact with the system through host functions.
This guarantee holds regardless of the agent’s capability or
intent. It is binary—either the agent is sandboxed or it is
not—and does not depend on the accuracy of any classifier.

Detection is probabilistic: ProbeLogits classifies
actions as harmful or safe with 97.3% accuracy on 7B Q4_0
(F1 = 0.980, precision = 1.000) using contextual calibration,
safety-priming prompts, and a lightweight rule-based defense
pipeline.
This accuracy improves with model size and prompt quality but
is never 100%.

The combination is more powerful than either alone. A system
with only enforcement (no detection) would sandbox agents but
have no visibility into their behavior. A system with only
detection (no enforcement) could identify harmful actions but
not prevent them if the agent bypasses the detector. Anima OS
provides both: detection informs the graduated response, and
enforcement ensures the response is applied.

8.4 Why Now?

The convergence of three technologies makes kernel-level AI
integration practical in 2026:

1.

Quantization: 4-bit quantization (Q4_0)
reduces a 7B model from 14 GB to 4.1 GB, fitting
in commodity RAM.

2.

SIMD: AVX-512 VNNI enables efficient
4-bit matrix-vector multiplication without GPU
acceleration.

3.

Sub-100ms latency: 65 ms per forward pass
on 7B makes per-action governance practical—fast
enough to classify every agent action without
user-perceptible delay.

Five years ago, 7B inference required seconds on CPU. Today
it requires 65 ms. This 100 improvement transforms
LLM inference from an application-level service to a viable
kernel primitive.

9 Related Work

AI-oriented operating systems.

AIOS [22] extends a Python-based framework with
LLM-oriented scheduling and memory management (published at COLM 2025).
OS-Copilot [12]
uses LLMs to automate Linux system administration tasks.
PunkGo [23] proposes a Rust sovereignty kernel for
verifiable AI agent execution with Merkle audit logs, the closest
related work in kernel-level AI governance. Microsoft’s Agent
Governance Toolkit [21] provides application-level
runtime security for AI agents.
All operate atop existing operating systems (or focus on
verification rather than inference), inheriting the latency and
bypassability problems discussed in 2.2.
Anima OS differs by integrating inference directly into a
bare-metal kernel, enabling logit-level primitives.

Inference engines.

llama.cpp [7] is the state-of-the-art CPU inference
engine, with extensive SIMD optimization and broad hardware
support. My bare-metal engine achieves parity on
bandwidth-limited 7B workloads and 1.39 superiority on
compute-bound 135M workloads. The performance advantage comes
from eliminating OS scheduling overhead and using work-stealing,
not from superior algorithms.

Serving systems.

vLLM [19] introduces PagedAttention for efficient KV
cache memory management in serving. SGLang [17]
optimizes structured generation programs with RadixAttention.
Both focus on serving throughput (requests per second), while
my KV cache primitives focus on process state management
(checkpoint, restore, fork). The two approaches address
different problems.

Constitutional AI.

Bai et al. [2] introduce constitutional
AI as a training-time technique: the model is trained with
AI feedback guided by a set of principles. My approach is
complementary—I enforce constitutional principles at
runtime in the kernel, regardless of how the model was
trained. The two approaches can be combined: a model trained
with constitutional AI would produce more accurate ProbeLogits
classifications.

Safety classifiers.

Llama Guard [8, 20] is a fine-tuned safety
classifier achieving F1 0.93–0.95 on its benchmark.
WildGuard [26] achieves macro-F1 0.907 on
WildGuardTest. NeMo Guardrails [11] provides
programmable safety rails for LLM applications. All operate
as external classifiers at the application level, requiring
dedicated models. ProbeLogits differs by using the
same model that performs inference for classification
(no second model overhead, F1 = 0.980 on 260 OS action prompts
with a general-purpose 7B model and zero learned fine-tuning), and by
operating below the WASM sandbox boundary where the agent
cannot intercept or skip the safety check.

Constrained decoding.

Outlines [13] and Guidance [5] implement
constrained decoding in Python/C++. llguidance [9]
(Microsoft) uses PDA-based algorithms for CFG constraints. My
current grammar support is limited to choice/boolean constraints;
I plan to port llguidance to no_std for full CFG
support.

Representation engineering.

Burns et al. [3] discover latent knowledge in
LLM representations without supervision. Zou et al. [28]
propose representation engineering as a top-down approach to
AI transparency. These works inspire my hidden state behavior
analysis but operate as research tools, not OS primitives
(8.2).

Distributed inference.

Petals [14] enables collaborative inference by
splitting model layers across networked machines. Anima OS’s
AnimaNet takes a different approach: distributing
agents (not tensors) across nodes, with Raft [15]
consensus for coordination.

Capability security.

seL4 [16] provides formally verified capability-based
security. CHERI provides hardware-enforced capabilities. Anima
OS uses Ed25519-signed capability tokens for agent permissions,
drawing on the capability security tradition but applied to
AI agent governance.

Rust bare-metal operating systems.

Theseus OS [18] and RedLeaf explore Rust’s type system
for OS safety guarantees. These systems demonstrate the viability
of Rust for kernel development but do not address AI integration.
Anima OS builds on this foundation, extending bare-metal Rust
to AI inference and governance.

LLM agent frameworks.

AutoGPT [1], LangChain [6],
CrewAI [4], and MetaGPT [10] orchestrate
LLM-based agents in Python. These frameworks provide convenience
but operate entirely in userspace, with no kernel-level
governance or inference integration.

10 Limitations

GPU acceleration.

Anima OS currently runs CPU-only inference. For models beyond
7B parameters, GPU acceleration is essential. Bare-metal GPU
compute (AMD RDNA or NVIDIA) requires reverse-engineering
proprietary interfaces, which remains a significant engineering
challenge.

ProbeLogits accuracy.

On OS action classification, the full pipeline achieves
F1 = 0.980 (model-only: F1 = 0.941) on 7B Q4_0. On ToxicChat
(1,000 free-form user conversations), F1 ranges from 0.740
() to 0.837 (), with the default
yielding F1 = 0.790 due to a significant
false-positive problem on conversational input. For context,
Llama Guard 3 8B [20] achieves F1 0.939.
The gap reflects ProbeLogits’ design as an action classifier
(not a chat moderator) and the lack of fine-tuning. Notably,
the optimal differs by domain ( for OS
actions, for chat), suggesting domain-specific
calibration profiles as future work. Multi-model evaluation
(Llama 3, Mistral), additional standard benchmarks (XSTest),
and independent annotators would strengthen the results.

Grammar expressiveness.

Current grammar support is limited to choice and boolean
constraints. Full context-free grammar (CFG) support—enabling
JSON Schema validation, regex constraints, and arbitrary
structured output—requires porting a PDA-based engine (such
as llguidance [9]) to no_std. I
estimate this at approximately two weeks of engineering effort.

Benchmark breadth and methodology.

The custom benchmark (260 prompts, one model, one hardware
configuration) has several methodological limitations:
(1) ground-truth labels were assigned by a single annotator
(the system developer), creating a risk of label optimization;
(2) the adversarial pre-filter and privacy keyword boost were
iteratively tuned against these same prompts, which risks
overfitting to the test set;
(3) only one model family (Qwen2.5) is evaluated—
generalization to Llama, Mistral, or Phi is not established.
The ToxicChat evaluation (1,000 prompts, F1 = 0.790)
partially addresses concern (1) by using independent
human-annotated labels, but reveals that the high custom
benchmark accuracy does not generalize to free-form chat.
Broader evaluation across models, benchmarks, and annotators
would strengthen the results.

Formal verification.

The governance system’s non-bypassability claim rests on
WASM isolation properties, which I have not formally verified.
TLA+ or Iris specifications of the governance invariants
would significantly strengthen the security argument. I
note that WASM sandboxing is a well-studied isolation
mechanism, but formal verification of the specific Anima OS
host function interface has not been performed.

TLS certificate verification.

The current TLS 1.3 implementation uses
UnsecureProvider (no certificate validation).
Production deployment requires integration of a
no_std X.509 certificate verifier such as webpki.

Multi-agent demonstrations.

While the infrastructure for multi-agent systems is complete
(lifecycle, trust, capabilities, migration, Raft), I have not
yet demonstrated complex multi-agent scenarios with realistic
workloads. End-to-end demonstrations with cooperating and
competing agents would validate the governance and trust
systems under realistic conditions.

11 Conclusion

I presented ProbeLogits, the first OS primitive that exposes
LLM logit vectors as kernel-level abstractions for semantic
classification, uncertainty measurement, and governance
enforcement. ProbeLogits eliminates text generation, parsing,
and IPC from the classification path, reducing latency from
650 ms (generate-then-parse) to 65 ms (single forward
pass) on a 7B model.

The key finding is that bare-metal inference reaches the
hardware bandwidth limit: 65 ms per token on 7B corresponds
to 85% of the theoretical DDR5-6000 bandwidth ceiling. No
software optimization can improve this further on the same
hardware—the path forward is higher memory bandwidth or
GPU acceleration.

ProbeLogits, combined with KV cache process state operations
and kernel-enforced constitutional governance, demonstrates
that an AI-native kernel can provide capabilities impossible
in layered architectures: sub-millisecond semantic classification
(135M), kernel-enforced safety guarantees via WASM sandbox
isolation (defense-in-depth), and process-level management of inference state
(checkpoint, restore, fork).

The calibration parameter provides a deployment-time
knob for precision-recall tradeoff, enabling domain-specific
safety policies without retraining.

As AI agents become as common as processes, the operating system
must evolve from a passive resource manager to an active
participant in the inference loop. ProbeLogits is a first step
toward that future.

References

[1]

T. Richards et al., “AutoGPT: An Autonomous GPT-4 Experiment,”
GitHub repository, 2023.

[2]

Y. Bai et al., “Constitutional AI: Harmlessness from AI Feedback,”
arXiv:2212.08073, 2022.

[3]

C. Burns, H. Ye, D. Klein, and J. Steinhardt,
“Discovering Latent Knowledge in Language Models Without Supervision,”
ICLR 2023.

[4]

J. Moura, “CrewAI: Framework for Orchestrating Role-Playing
Autonomous AI Agents,” GitHub repository, 2024.

[5]

S. Lundberg et al., “Guidance: A Language for Controlling Large
Language Models,” GitHub repository, 2023.

[6]

H. Chase, “LangChain: Building Applications with LLMs through
Composability,” GitHub repository, 2022.

[7]

G. Gerganov, “llama.cpp: LLM inference in C/C++,”
GitHub repository, 2023.

[8]

H. Inan et al., “Llama Guard: LLM-based Input-Output Safeguard
for Human-AI Conversations,” arXiv:2312.06674, 2023.

[9]

Microsoft, “llguidance: Fast Constrained Decoding Library,”
GitHub repository, 2024.

[10]

S. Hong et al., “MetaGPT: Meta Programming for A Multi-Agent
Collaborative Framework,” ICLR 2024.

[11]

S. Rebuffi et al., “NeMo Guardrails: A Toolkit for Controllable
and Safe LLM Applications with Programmable Rails,”
arXiv:2310.10501, 2023.

[12]

Z. Wu et al., “OS-Copilot: Towards Generalist Computer Agents
with Self-Improvement,” arXiv:2402.07456, 2024.

[13]

B. Willard and R. Louf, “Efficient Guided Generation for Large
Language Models,” arXiv:2307.09702, 2023.

[14]

A. Borzunov et al., “Petals: Collaborative Inference and
Fine-tuning of Large Models,” ACL 2023 (demo).

[15]

D. Ongaro and J. Ousterhout, “In Search of an Understandable
Consensus Algorithm,” USENIX ATC 2014.

[16]

G. Klein et al., “seL4: Formal Verification of an OS Kernel,”
SOSP 2009.

[17]

L. Zheng et al., “SGLang: Efficient Execution of Structured
Language Model Programs,” arXiv:2312.07104, 2023.

[18]

K. Boos, N. Liber, and L. Zhong,
“Theseus: An Experiment in Operating System Structure and
State Management,” OSDI 2020.

[19]

W. Kwon et al., “Efficient Memory Management for Large Language
Model Serving with PagedAttention,” SOSP 2023.

[20]

Meta, “Llama Guard 3-8B Model Card,”
https://github.com/meta-llama/PurpleLlama, 2024.

[21]

Microsoft, “Agent Governance Toolkit: Open-Source Runtime
Security for AI Agents,” 2026.

[22]

K. Mei et al., “AIOS: LLM Agent Operating System,”
COLM 2025.

[23]

Z. Zhang, “Right to History: A Sovereignty Kernel for
Verifiable AI Agent Execution,” arXiv:2602.20214, 2026.

[24]

T. Schick and H. Schütze, “Exploiting Cloze Questions for
Few-Shot Text Classification and Natural Language Inference,”
EACL 2021.

[25]

Z. Lin et al., “ToxicChat: Unveiling Hidden Challenges of
Toxicity Detection in Real-World User-AI Conversation,”
Findings of EMNLP 2023.

[26]

S. Han et al., “WildGuard: Open One-Stop Moderation Tools for
Safety Risks, Jailbreaks, and Refusals of LLMs,”
arXiv:2406.18495, 2024.

[27]

Z. Zhao, E. Wallace, S. Feng, D. Klein, and S. Singh,
“Calibrate Before Use: Improving Few-Shot Performance of
Language Models,” ICML 2021.

[28]

A. Zou et al., “Representation Engineering: A Top-Down Approach
to AI Transparency,” arXiv:2310.01405, 2023.

Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by

L
A
T
E

xml

.

Instructions for reporting errors

We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:

Click the "Report Issue" () button, located in the page header.

Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.

Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
all.

Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.

We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.

About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)

Major funding support from
