1

Scheduling Parallel Optical Circuit Switches for AI Training

arXiv:2603.07373v1 [cs.NI] 7 Mar 2026

Kevin Liang

Litao Qiao

Abstract—The rapid growth of AI training has dramatically
increased datacenter traffic demand and energy consumption,
which has motivated renewed interest in optical circuit switches
(OCSes) as a high-bandwidth, energy-efficient alternative for
AI fabrics. Deploying multiple parallel OCSes is a leading
alternative. However, efficiently scheduling time-varying traffic
matrices across parallel optical switches with non-negligible
reconfiguration delays remains an open challenge.
We consider the problem of scheduling a single AI traffic
demand matrix D over s parallel OCSes while minimizing
the makespan under reconfiguration delay δ. Our algorithm
S PECTRA relies on a three-step approach: Decompose D into a
minimal set of weighted permutations; Schedule these permutations across parallel switches using load-aware assignment; then
Equalize the imbalanced loads on the switches via controlled permutation splitting. Evaluated on realistic AI training workloads
(GPT model and Qwen MoE expert routing) as well as standard
benchmarks, S PECTRA vastly outperforms a baseline based on
state-of-the-art algorithms, reducing schedule makespan by an
average factor of 1.4× on GPT AI workloads, 1.9× on MoE
AI workloads, and 2.4× on standard benchmarks. Further, the
makespans achieved by S PECTRA consistently approach newly
derived lower bounds.
Index Terms—Optical circuit switch, matrix decomposition, AI
datacenter

I. I NTRODUCTION

D

ATACENTER networks have had trouble scaling at the
speed of large-scale AI training compute, especially lagging the AI bandwidth and power constraints [1]–[3]. Unlike
traditional cloud workloads, AI training compute produces
sustained high bisection bandwidth demand with repeated
collective communication patterns across a large number of
accelerators [4]. Due to its tight iteration-level synchronization constraints, it is extremely sensitive to the worst-case
completion time, i.e., the collective makespan also known
as collective completion time (CCT). These properties stress
networks based on conventional electronic packet-switched
fabrics, whose power and bandwidth abilities scale poorly with
network size [1].
There has been a significant body of literature proposing
the use of optical circuit switches (OCSes) in datacenters as a
compelling alternative [1], [5]–[8]. In comparison with electronic packet switches, OCSes provide much higher bandwidth
at much lower per-bit energy, both of which are important
in meeting the rapidly increasing demands on AI datacenter
networks. To increase aggregated capacity, prior work increasingly considers employing parallel OCSes [9]–[13]. On the
other hand, OCSes suffer from reconfiguration delays that can
significantly affect the CCT of the AI training collectives.
K. Liang, L. Qiao and B. Lin are with UC San Diego (e-mails: {k3liang,
l1qiao, billlin}@ucsd.edu). I. Keslassy is with the Technion and UC Berkeley
(isaac@technion.ac.il). This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible
publication.

Isaac Keslassy

Bill Lin

In this paper, we consider the problem of scheduling an
AI traffic demand matrix over a set of parallel OCSes with
reconfiguration delays, while minimizing the makespan (and
therefore the CCT) across the parallel switches.
Related work. The existing literature mostly minimizes schedule length either assuming a single optical switch, or a multistage switch architecture that can be abstracted as a single
switch [6]–[8]. In particular, these existing works focus on
the scheduling of a given traffic demand matrix D onto an
OCS by decomposing D into a sequence of configurations
of given durations, such that the traffic demands from D are
served. A critical difference with an analogous decomposition
problem for electronic switches is that OCSes incur a nontrivial reconfiguration delay δ when the switch configuration
has to change, which adds to the total delay (the makespan)
in servicing D. Existing works (e.g., [6]–[8]) are effective in
solving this scheduling problem with reconfiguration delays
for the single OCS case.
L ESS [9] is the most relevant work on scheduling a demand
matrix D for s parallel OCSes. It splits D into s sub-matrices
using a balancing criterion, then schedules each sub-matrix on
a separate OCS. However, L ESS focuses more on a partialreconfiguration scheduling algorithm intended for partiallyreconfigurable switches. Additional works consider parallel
OCSes, but under different assumptions: They (1) achieve
a distributed scheduling [10], but with lower matching efficiency; (2) use OCSes to route around failures [11]; (3) extend
results to a multi-hop schedule [12], which we do not consider
in this paper; and (4) focus on integer-weight decompositions [13].
Contributions. We introduce the S PECTRA algorithm for
scheduling an AI demand matrix D across s parallel switches
with reconfiguration delay, while minimizing a CCT-based
makespan objective. A key idea of S PECTRA is to cut the problem into three successive sub-problems, each practically solved
with polynomial-time algorithms: (i) D ECOMPOSE D into a
set of permutations, (ii) S CHEDULE these permutations across
the s switches via load-aware scheduling, then (iii) E QUALIZE
the loads on the switches by splitting the durations of some
of the permutations on the most-loaded switches and moving
part of their load to the least-loaded ones. We rigorously
derive new lower bounds on the achievable makespan for
arbitrary demand matrices by any parallel OCS scheduling
algorithm. We also introduce a new Qwen-57B Mixture of
Experts (MoE) workload by measuring its traffic in a 64GPU cluster. We then compare S PECTRA against a BASELINE
algorithm that extends the sparsity ideas of L ESS [9], as
well as against an E CLIPSE [6]-based version of S PECTRA,
using three workloads: (i) a GPT-based AI training model,
(ii) the new Qwen MoE measurements, and (iii) a standard

2



i ∈ 1, k h . Then, extending Eq. (1), the set of all s switch
schedules covers D when
 h

s
k
X
X

αih Pih  ≥ D.
(3)
h=1

i=1

The makespan of the s parallel switch schedules is the delay
of the longest one, i.e., using Eq. (2),
 h

k
X

max 
(4)
δ + αih  .
1≤h≤s

Fig. 1.

Datacenter network topology with s parallel OCSes.

benchmark in the literature. S PECTRA vastly outperforms
BASELINE, with a schedule that is on average shorter by
a factor of 1.4× on GPT AI workloads, 1.9× on MoE AI
workloads, and 2.4× on standard benchmarks. It also always
outperforms the E CLIPSE-based variant. More importantly, the
makespans achieved by S PECTRA are consistently approaching
the theoretically derived lower bounds, consistently achieving
near-optimality evaluation in practice with fast polynomialtime algorithms, with robust performance across sparse and
dense traffic regimes. Our results show that algorithmic codesign of traffic decomposition and parallel OCS scheduling
is critical for improving optical circuit switching for nextgeneration AI datacenters.1
We plan to share the code upon publication.
II. P ROBLEM F ORMULATION
Demand matrix. As Fig. 1 illustrates, we consider a datacenter core of s parallel optical circuit switches (OCSes). Each
OCS has n input and output ports, connected to the Top-ofRack (ToR) switches of n datacenter racks. Periodically, a
centralized controller computes a new n × n traffic demand
matrix D. Each Dij corresponds to the amount of traffic that
needs to be switched from rack i to rack j over the next period.
Switch schedule. Each OCS has a schedule that consists of a
sequence of permutations, where each input rack i is connected
to a single output rack j. A sequence of k permutations
P1 , P2 , . . . , Pk , with corresponding weights α1 , α2 , . . . , αk >
0 is said to cover D if the following is satisfied:
k
X

αi Pi ≥ D.

(1)

i=1

In addition, the optical switch needs a reconfiguration delay
δ before each permutation. Thus, the time needed to schedule
the k permutations in a single switch is
k
k
X
X
(δ + αi ) = k · δ +
αi .
i=1

(2)

i=1

Makespan. We now consider the s schedules of the s optical
switches. As above, consider some switch h, with h ∈ [1, s].
Assume that each such switch uses a schedule with k h
permutations Pih and their corresponding weights αih , for
1 This paper extends our earlier short letter publication [14].

i=1

Objective. The goal of this paper is to find all permutations
and weights in the s schedules of the s parallel optical
switches, so that they manage to cover D (Eq. (3)) while
minimizing the makespan.
The general minimization problem of the above objective is
NP-hard, even with s = 1 [15]. Thus, in this paper, we focus
on finding a practical algorithm that typically attains a small
makespan in practice.
III. A LGORITHMS
A. Overview
In this section, we introduce our S PECTRA algorithm
(short for Scheduling ParallEl Circuit switches for data center TRAffic). As formally defined in §II, S PECTRA finds s
schedules of D over s parallel optical switches, such that
the schedules cover D while attaining a small makespan. We
start by illustrating S PECTRA’s three-step approach using an
example, before formally defining each step.
D ECOMPOSE. The first step in S PECTRA is to D ECOMPOSE a
demand matrix D into a set of permutations {P1 , P 2, . . . , Pk }
with a corresponding set of weights {α
Pk1 , α2 , . . . , αk } such that
their weighted sum covers D. i.e., i=1 αi Pi ≥ D.
Consider the demand D shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 3 provides an
example of how D can be decomposed into 3 permutations,
with the corresponding weights 0.61, 0.3, and 0.1. Fig. 3 also
shows that their weighted sum indeed covers D. As detailed
later in this section, given at most k nonzero elements in any
row or column of D, our D ECOMPOSE algorithm guarantees
that exactly k permutations will be generated to cover D. It
minimizes the number of reconfiguration delays needed while
also reducing the sum duration of the permutations.
S CHEDULE. After the D ECOMPOSE step, we next S CHEDULE
the k permutations across the s switches. This step is equivalent to scheduling k jobs across s machines, with each αi representing the amount of time that a job (permutation) Pi needs
to run, with added consideration for a reconfiguration delay
δ each time a machine (switch) needs to be (re)configured to
run a job (switch permutation).
For this step, we first sort the permutations by nonincreasing αi weights, and then we schedule the corresponding
Pi in non-increasing-weight-order to the least loaded switch
each time. Fig. 4 illustrates the S CHEDULE process for the
3 permutations from Fig. 3 across s = 2 switches with
reconfiguration delay δ = 0.01. Initially, both switches are
empty, as shown in Fig. 4. We first schedule the permutation

3

Algorithm 1 D ECOMPOSE
1: Input: D and δ
2: Assign: S = support matrix of D, Drem = D, Srem =

S, i = 1, A = {} and P = {}
3: while Srem ̸= ∅ do
Fig. 2.

Example of demand matrix D.

with α1 = 0.61 to the first switch, so the load of the first
switch becomes 0.61 + 0.01 = 0.62. We next schedule the
permutation with α2 = 0.3 to the second switch since it is
empty and hence the least loaded. The load of the second
switch becomes 0.3 + 0.01 = 0.31. Finally, we schedule the
last permutations with α3 = 0.1 to the second switch again,
since it remains the least loaded of the two switches, making
its final load 0.42. The makespan after the S CHEDULE step is
max(0.62, 0.42) = 0.62, as shown in Fig. 4(a).
E QUALIZE. As the final step, we aim to E QUALIZE the loads
on the switches by splitting the duration (αi ) of a permutation
(switch configuration) Pi into multiple segments and moving
some segments to different switches in order to load-balance
the workloads. In particular, our E QUALIZE step iteratively
balances the loads between the most loaded switch hmax and
the least loaded switch hmin by moving a portion of the
longest-duration permutation in hmax to hmin . This is shown
in Fig. 4(b), where we split α1 = 0.61 in the first switch into
two parts, an α11 = 0.515 part that remains in the first switch
and an α12 = 0.095 part that moves to the second switch,
resulting in the final makespan of 0.525, as shown in Fig. 4(b).
Each of the above steps is further detailed below.
B. D ECOMPOSE
Support matrix. Given an n × n matrix D, let S ∈ {0, 1}n×n
be its support matrix defined by Sij = 1 if Dij > 0 and
Sij = 0 otherwise. Let k be the degree of D, corresponding
to the maximum number of nonzero elements in any row or
column in D. By definition, the support matrix S for D will
also have a degree of k, corresponding to a maximum of k 1’s
in any row or column in S. The following property follows
from König’s Line Coloring Theorem:
Property 1. k permutations are necessary and sufficient to
cover any matrix of degree k.
D ECOMPOSE intuition. As Fig. 4(a) illustrates, the sum of
all the schedule delays will include (1) δ times the number of
permutations (in this example, 0.01 · 3), and (2) the sum of
the permutation weights (0.61 + 0.3 + 0.1 = 1.01). Thus, we
want to minimize both of these components.
(1) First, by Property 1, k permutations
can cover D via
Pk
some α1 , α2 , . . . , αk such that
α
P
≥ D. In our
i
i
i=1
approach, the goal of minimizing the number of permutations
is to later minimize the number of reconfiguration delays.
Therefore, our approach is to decompose D into exactly this
minimum number k of permutations.
(2) However, there may be many possible sets of k permutations that can cover D. Among these, we want to find a set of

Pi ← MWM-Node-Coverage(Drem , Srem )
αi ← min(a,b),(Pi )ab =1 (Drem )ab
P ← P ∪ {Pi }
A ← A ∪ {αi }
Drem ← Drem − (αi Pi )
Srem ← Srem − (Pi ∩ Srem )
10:
i←i+1
11: Â ← R EFINE(D, A, P)
12: return (Â, P)
4:
5:
6:
7:
8:
9:

permutations along with a set of parameters
Pk {α1 , α2 , . . . , αk }
that also minimizes the total duration i=1 αi .
D ECOMPOSE pseudocode. Alg. 1 shows the pseudocode of
our D ECOMPOSE algorithm. Given D, we first derive its
support matrix S. D ECOMPOSE then iteratively generates a
set of k permutations P = {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pk } that cover S by
solving a maximum weight matching (MWM) problem under
node coverage constraints [16] in each iteration.
At a high-level, we track the remaining traffic in D and the
remaining uncovered elements in S after each round, denoted
as Drem and Srem , respectively. They are initially Drem = D
and Srem = S. Based on the updated Drem and Srem in each
round, we would like to generate a permutation that satisfies
two properties. Based on the above intuition, (1) we want to
choose a permutation that is guaranteed to reduce the degree
of Srem in each round. This way, the algorithm will end after
exactly k rounds, generating exactly k permutations, where
k is the degree of the initial support matrix S. (2) Second,
among the permutations that will reduce the degree of Srem
by 1, we want to choose a permutation that will reduce the
amount of remaining traffic in Drem as much as possible.
Fortunately, this is a well-known optimization problem
called MWM under node coverage constraints [16], [17],
where efficient polynomial-time algorithms already exist to
satisfy our two desired properties. In this formulation, we
identify critical rows and columns in Srem , which are the
rows and columns that have k nonzero entries, where k is
the degree of Srem . To ensure that the degree of Srem gets
reduced by 1, we constrain the matching of every critical row
or column to a nonzero entry in that row or column. Among
the permutations that satisfy this constrained matching, we
use Drem as weights to optimize the MWM. This constrained
MWM problem can be solved in polynomial time using the
Hungarian algorithm [16], modified handle the above coverage
constraints. This is shown in Line 4 of Alg. 1.
For the generated Pi , we derive the initial weight αi by
taking the minimum entry (Drem )ab where the corresponding
entry (Pi )ab is a 1 (Line 5). We then update Drem and Srem
at the end of each round accordingly (Lines 8-9), and we
repeat the while-loop until all 1-elements in S are covered by
a permutation in P. Note that Srem at each round corresponds

4

Fig. 3.

Example decomposition into k = 3 weighted permutations that cover D.

Fig. 4.

(a) Scheduling the k = 3 permutations across s = 2 switches. (b) Equalizing the loads among the switches.

Algorithm 2 Subroutine R EFINE
1: Input: D, A and P
2: Â ← A


3: Drem ← D −

Pk

i=1 αi Pi

Algorithm 3 S CHEDULE
1: Input: A, P, s and δ
2: Sort P by non-increasing weights in A such that ασ(1) ≥



ασ(2) ≥ · · · ≥ ασ(k)
3: for h = 1 to s do

4: for i = 1 to k do
5:
d ← max(a,b),(Pi )ab =1 (Drem )ab
6:
α̂i ← α̂i + d
7:
for all (a, b) such that (Pi )ab = 1 do

Lh ← 0, P h ← {}, Ah ← {}
5: for i = 1 to k do
6:
h∗ = argminh Lh
∗
∗
7:
P h ← P h ∪ Pσ(i)
∗
∗
8:
Ah ← P h ∪ ασ(i)
9:
Lh∗ ← Lh∗ + δ + ασ(i)
4:

(Drem )ab ← max(0, (Drem )ab − d)
9: return Â

8:

10: S ← {(A1 , P 1 ), (A2 , P 2 ), . . . , (As , P s )}

to the remaining uncovered elements of S till that round, and
not necessarily to the support of Drem .
R EFINE subroutine. After the while-loop in Lines 3-10
of Alg. 1, we are guaranteed that the set of permutations
P = {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pk } will cover S, but the weighted sum with
the corresponding A = {α1 , α2 , . . . , αk } may not necessarily
cover D. This is because in Line 5, we are taking the minimum
value in Drem covered by Pi , but our stopping criterion is
just that the initial support matrix S is covered by the set of
permutations. The role of the final R EFINE step in Line 11
of Alg. 1 is to refine the set of weights to ensure that the
weighted sum indeed covers D.
Given a set of k permutations P = {P1 , P2 , . . . , Pk } that
covers S, we could readily derive a set of new weights Â =
{α̂1 , α̂2 , . . . , α̂k } such that the weighted sum covers D, by
solving the following linear programming (LP) problem:

min

k
X
i=1

α̂i ,

s.t.

k
X

α̂i Pi ≥ D.

(5)

i=1

Instead, starting from the initial weights A
=
{α1 , α2 , . . . , αk } from Lines 3-10, we greedily increase
the weights to a new set of weights Â such that the weighted
sum covers D (see Alg. 2). We find that in practice this
greedy approach works just as well as solving the LP.

11: return S

C. S CHEDULE
After the D ECOMPOSE step, we have a set of permutations
P and their corresponding weights Â. In the S CHEDULE
step, we want to assign each of these permutations to one
of the s switches to minimize the makespan (Eq. (4)). This is
equivalent to the makespan minimization problem on identical
parallel machines, for which the Longest Processing Time
(LPT) First algorithm [18] is a well-known and effective
greedy heuristic. We adopt it for our S CHEDULE step (Alg. 3).
S CHEDULE pseudocode. In this greedy algorithm, we first
sort the permutations by non-increasing weights, as shown in
Line 2. We then initialize the load Lh for all switches to 0
with no permutations assigned to switch h yet, as shown in
Lines 3-4. Then in Lines 5-9, following a non-increasing order
of weights, we assign in a greedy manner the corresponding
permutation to the least loaded switch (Line 6), add the
permutation to the set of permutations already assigned to
that switch (Lines 7-8), and update the load of that switch,
including the reconfiguration delay δ (Line 9). In the end, the
procedure returns the schedule S of the s switches in the form
of weights and permutations (Ah , P h ) per switch.

5

Algorithm 4 E QUALIZE
1: Input: S = {(A1 , P 1 ), (A2 , P 2 ), . . . , (As , P s )}, s and δ
2: for h = 1 to sh do
Pk
3:
Lh ← i=1 (δ + αih )
4: cont ← TRUE
5: while cont do

hmax = argmaxh Lh
hmin = argminh Lh
if (Lhmax − Lhmin ) > δ then
µ ← (Lhmax + Lhmin + δ) /2
z ← argmaxi αihmax
11:
if αzhmax > (Lhmax − µ) then
12:
τ ← Lhmax − µ
13:
αzhmax ← αzhmax − τ
14:
Copy permutation Pzhmax to P hmin
15:
Add τ as corresponding weight to Ahmin
16:
Lhmax ← Lhmax − τ
17:
Lhmin ← Lhmin + δ + τ
18:
else
19:
cont ← FALSE
20:
else
21:
cont ← FALSE
22: Ŝ ← updated {(A1 , P 1 ), (A2 , P 2 ), . . . , (As , P s )}
23: return Ŝ
6:
7:
8:
9:
10:

Given some row or column of D, we provide below several
lower bounds using different approaches. Then, the maximum
of all these lower bounds over all rows/columns is also a lower
bound for the makespan.
Property 2. Assume that an alternative demand matrix Di
constructed with the same row/column i ∈ [1, 2n] as D and
(l)
zero everywhere else yields L lower bounds LBi for l ∈
[1, L] on its schedule makespan. Then a lower bound on the
schedule makespan for D is
(l)

LB = max max LBi .
i∈[1,2n] l∈[1,L]

Proof: To schedule D we need to schedule at least its
(l)
row/column i, so LBi is a lower bound on the makespan for
D. Moreover, the finite cartesian product of finite sets also has
a finite cardinality; and for any finite set of finite numbers, the
maximum element exists, is within that set, and is also finite.
Thus, the maximum of the lower bounds is a lower bound
(l)
itself, and it will be one of these lower bounds LBi .
Lower bound 1. We start by demonstrating a general lower
bound for any number of elements per row/column.
Theorem 1 (Lower bound 1). Assume that row/column i has
ki nonzero elements and a total weight wi . Then the scheduling
makespan has lower bound
wi + δ · max (ki , s)
(7)
s
Proof: Any set of s schedules that we produce needs to
schedule at least the ki nonzero elements of row/column i ∈
{1, . . . , 2n}. To determine a lower bound, we assume that this
is all we need to service and neglect the other elements in the
demand matrix. We need at least ki scheduling configurations
to schedule ki elements. Their total weight also needs to be
at least wi . Thus, the sum of the s schedule lengths will be at
least wi plus the reconfiguration times, i.e., wi + ki · δ. Since
we have s parallel schedules, the worst-case schedule duration
i ·δ
is at least the average schedule duration, i.e., at least wi +k
.
s
In addition, we need to schedule wi over the s switches,
yielding a wi /s average delay, and each switch needs at least
δ reconfiguration time. Thus another lower bound is wsi + δ.
Combining both, we get the result.
Example. Assume that in row/column i of doubly-stochastic
demand matrix D, there are ki = 16 nonzero elements. If
(1)
s = 4, then our lower bound is LBi = 1+16·δ
= 1/4 + 4 · δ.
4
Lower bound 2. We now prove a second lower bound for the
special case where the number ki of nonzero elements in row
or column i exactly equals s. We start with a useful lemma.
(1)

D. E QUALIZE
Finally, Fig. 4(b) illustrates how we can reduce the
makespan by redistributing some of the switching load from
one switch to another.
E QUALIZE pseudocode. The pseudocode for this E QUALIZE
step is shown in Alg. 4. We first compute the loads Lh for
each switch after the S CHEDULE step in Lines 2-3. We then
iteratively equalize the loads in Lines 5-21 by moving a portion
of the load from the most loaded switch hmax to the least
loaded switch hmin . Lines 6-7 identify hmax and hmin . If
the difference between them is more than δ, we compute the
target load µ to be the average of the two loads that includes
a δ delay when a portion of hmax is moved to hmin (Lines
8-9). In the most loaded switch hmax , we identify the index
z of the longest-duration permutation in hmax in Line 10.
If the weight of this permutation αzhmax is more than the
difference between the current and target load of hmax , then
we move the difference τ from αzhmax in hmax to hmin by
copying the corresponding permutation Pzhmax to switch hmin
and assigning a weight of τ to it (Lines 11-15). We then adjust
the loads of the two switches accordingly in Lines 16-17. The
iterations continue as long as load balancing is possible.
IV. L OWER B OUNDS
In this section, we provide new lower bounds for the
scheduling makespan of any demand matrix D using s optical
switches and a reconfiguration cost of δ > 0.
Notations. We index the rows and columns of n × n matrix
D using i ∈ [1, 2n], such that the first n indices cover the n
rows and the next n indices correspond to the n columns. We
also denote x+ ≡ max (x, 0).

(6)

LBi

=

Lemma 1. If row/column i has ki = s nonzero elements, and
there is a total of s+m configurations in the s parallel schedules, then the s parallel schedules will necessarily service at
most m element chunks. In other words, at least s − m whole
elements will be serviced within a single configuration and
will not be spread between configurations.
Proof: We will prove the lemma by induction on m. First,
if there are no reconfigurations at all (m = 0) and the s
nonzero elements are scheduled by the s configurations of the

6

s parallel schedules, then necessarily each element is assigned
to a single distinct configuration and single distinct schedule.
That is, they cannot be combined within any schedule in any
way. Otherwise, if one of them were cut into two chunks
that are serviced by different configurations and/or schedules,
then we would have s + 1 chunks serviced within the s
schedules. Thus, by the pigeonhole principle, at least one
schedule would service at least two chunks, which would need
a reconfiguration. Contradiction.
Assume that the statement holds for m ≥ 0, and let’s
prove it for m + 1 ≥ 1 reconfigurations. (1) Assume that
the last reconfiguration of at least one schedule out of the
s schedules is followed by (a) an element chunk or (b) a
zeroed element. Then by removing the reconfiguration and
(a) appending the element chunk to another chunk of this
element, or (b) throwing out the zeroed element, we get a valid
schedule with m reconfigurations. By the inductive hypothesis,
this alternative valid schedule would have at most m chunks,
and therefore we can conclude that our real schedule has at
most m + 1 chunks. (2) Else, if only full nonzero elements
follow reconfigurations, either (a) all nonzero elements are full
and there are no element chunks, which proves the result, or
(b) at least one schedule starts with a nonzero element chunk.
Permute this nonzero element chunk with any nonzero full
element that follows a reconfiguration, and we get back to
case (1). Thus all cases hold for m + 1.
Theorem 2 (Lower bound 2). Assume that row/column i has
ki = s nonzero elements x1 ≥ x2 ≥ · · · ≥ xs , and a total
weight wi . Then the scheduling makespan has lower bound
(2)

LBi




wi + 1 · δ
, xs + δ ,
= δ + min x1 , max x2 ,
s


wi + m · δ 
min max xm+1 ,
.
s
2≤m≤s2

(8)

Proof: To establish the lower bound, we assume again that
we only want to schedule the nonzero elements of row/column
i ∈ {1, . . . , 2n}, and neglect all the other elements in D.
We can use Lemma 1. With no reconfigurations, all elements
are serviced as whole elements (within a single configuration)
and do not need to be split into several chunks. Thus the
makespan is at least the weight of the strongest element x1 ,
since it cannot be split, together with its configuration cost δ.
Likewise, with m reconfigurations, at least s−m elements will
be serviced within a single configuration, and only m elements
can be split. In particular, at least one element of weight at
least xm+1 will be serviced within a single configuration, so
the makespan is at least xm+1 + δ.
Assume that our optimal schedule uses m reconfigurations.
The theorem successively considers all possible numbers m
of reconfigurations, and the makespan beyond the initial
configuration cost of δ:
(0) Assume we have no reconfiguration at all. Then we saw
that the makespan is at least δ + x1 . Note that adding the
average weight wi /s to δ would also be a lower bound for
the makespan (as also shown in Theorem 1 using ki = s), but
since x1 is the maximum weight, x1 ≥ wi /s so it forms a
tighter lower bound.
(1) Assume we have exactly m = 1 reconfiguration. Then

after the initial configuration cost of δ, the makespan is at
least (a) x2 , as we saw; (b) the average schedule length, given
that the total schedule length is the sum of the weight wi and
the reconfiguration delay δ, and that there are s schedules;
and (c) the weight xs of the smallest element together with
the reconfiguration delay δ. This is because we saw that at
most one element is cut. Consider the unique schedule with
the reconfiguration delay. If both of its configurations are two
chunks of the same cut element, then we can just get a better
schedule by merging them and removing the reconfiguration,
so this cannot happen. So at least one of the two elements
in the schedule with the reconfiguration delay is not cut, thus
its weight is at least xs . To conclude with m = 1, since the
makespan is at least all of these three options, it is also at
least their maximum.
(m) Assume we have m ≥ 2 reconfigurations. Then after the
initial δ, the makespan is at least (a) xm+1 , as we saw; and
(b) the average schedule length, given that the total schedule
length is the sum of the weight wi and the m reconfiguration
delays of δ each, and that there are s schedules. Thus it is at
least the maximum of these two options.
Finally, since two chunks of the same element within the
same schedule can always be merged, the optimal number of
decompositions is no more than s2 , and therefore bounded.
Moreover, an optimal number of reconfigurations with a
minimal makespan could be any m, so the minimum of these
values forms a lower bound.
Note that when its condition ki = s holds, the lower bound
from Theorem 2 is at least as good as the first one from
(2)
(1)
Theorem 1: LBi ≥ LBi . Furthermore, it is strictly better
when not all nonzero elements are equal. Specifically, the first
(1)
lower bound becomes LBi = wsi + δ. The proof details the
case with m = 0 reconfigurations, and in the other cases the
inequality is strict as δ + wi +m·δ
> δ + wsi for m > 0.
s
Moreover, in the appendix, we show that when the n × n
demand matrix D is the sum of k random weighted permutations, for a large enough n, it is highly likely that D’s degree
is k, meaning there is at least one row or column with exactly
k nonzero elements, and therefore we can apply the lower
bounds of §IV to some row/column i using the parameter k.
This applies to the benchmark workload in the evaluations.
V. E VALUATIONS
A. Settings
We now want to evaluate our S PECTRA algorithm. These
evaluations have two goals. First, evaluate S PECTRA on traffic
matrices from AI training workloads. To do so, we use both
a relatively sparse and strongly skewed matrix from a GPT
model, as well as introduce a relatively dense and uniform
matrix from a model with Mixture of Experts (MoE). A
second goal is to compare S PECTRA with previous state-ofthe-art algorithms that were designed for similar objectives,
and understand the impact of different characteristics of D.
To do so, we use a standard benchmark workload that has
already been used in the evaluations of several papers.
AI training workload 1: GPT-3B. Our first AI training
workload results from a GPT model [19] with 3B parameters.

7

Li et al. [20] use Microsoft’s DeepSpeed framework [21] to
apply a hybrid parallelism that combines pipeline parallelism
(PP), tensor parallelism (TP) and data parallelism (DP). They
also adopt the default mapping approach of DeepSpeed in a
platform of 32 RTX3090 GPUs. They obtain a 32 × 32 total
traffic matrix D that is strongly skewed and quite sparse. We
then normalize D to make it doubly stochastic, and add a small
Gaussian noise to nonzero elements of standard deviation
σ = 0.3% as in the literature benchmark.
AI training workload 2: MoE. We introduce a new workload
with MoE traffic. We implement the Qwen2 MoE model (57B)
on Megatron-LM across 64 NVIDIA H100 GPUs, organized
as 8 HGX nodes (with 80 GB per GPU). We use 64 experts,
with each expert being placed on one of 64 GPUs. We load
the weights to model iterations at the end of training rather
than at the start. During each training iteration, we track
communication traces between experts and accumulate the
iteration’s traffic into a 64 × 64 demand matrix D, where each
entry is the token count from source to destination.
Workload 3: Benchmark. We use the standard benchmark in
the field [6], [7], [9]. It builds a 100 × 100 demand D that
consists of m = 16 random flows per source port, including
4 large flows, which evenly split 70% of the bandwidth, and
12 small flows, which evenly split 30%, to reflect the sparse
and skewed datacenter traffic. Each flow corresponds to a
permutation matrix, and the sum of flows yields D. Finally,
the nonzero demands are perturbed with small Gaussian noise
of standard deviation 0.3% of the link bandwidth.
Algorithms. We want to evaluate our S PECTRA algorithm
against the best state-of-the-art optical switch scheduling
algorithms. Unfortunately, most algorithms in the literature
consider a single optical switch and cannot be applied to
scheduling across s parallel optical switches. We compare
S PECTRA against two algorithms:
(1) BASELINE. The closest to our work is L ESS [9], which
considers scheduling a demand matrix D across s parallel
optical switches by splitting D into s sub-workload matrices
D1 , . . . , Ds , each Di to be independently scheduled on switch
i. The splitting objective is to maximize the sparsity in these
sub-workload matrices by minimizing the sum of nonzero
elements across D1 , . . . , Ds . While L ESS uses a partialreconfiguration scheduling algorithm intended for partiallyreconfigurable switches, we adopt its sparsity-based approach
as our BASELINE for comparisons. For an apples-to-apples
comparison, we also use our D ECOMPOSE algorithm to schedule the sub-workload matrices in BASELINE, since L ESS does
not provide a similar decomposition algorithm.
(2) S PECTRA (E CLIPSE). Since E CLIPSE [6] is considered
the state-of-the-art in decomposition with reconfiguration delays, we also compare against a S PECTRA version that uses
E CLIPSE [6] for the D ECOMPOSE step in place of our decomposition algorithm described in §III-B.
Implementation and Runs. For the Hungarian algorithm,
we implemented an efficient variant called the Jonker and
Volgenant algorithm that runs faster in practice [22], [23]. We
conduct our experiments on a computer with a 3.7 GHz AMD

Fig. 5. MoE traffic matrix heatmap from 64 sender GPUs (rows) to 64
receiver GPUs (columns).

Ryzen Threadripper 3970X Processor and 128 GB of memory,
running on Ubuntu 20.04.6 LTS. The runtimes for S PECTRA
are from under 1 ms to 14 ms.2 Each datapoint is the average
of 50 runs with random matrices.
B. AI Workloads
Fig. 5 shows the distribution of traffic during an iteration
of the Qwen model. Its traffic is relatively dense. It is slightly
non-uniform between different experts, but more dense and
uniform than the GPT pattern, and slightly more uniform than
some other smaller examples in the literature [1], [24], [25].
Fig. 6 presents the results for the sparse skewed GPT
workload (Fig. 6(a)) and for the dense near-uniform MoE
workload (Fig. 6(b)). It also shows our derived lower bound
(§IV). In all cases, S PECTRA far outperforms BASELINE. In
fact, S PECTRA’s schedule is 1.4× shorter than BASELINE on
average on GPT traffic, and 1.9× shorter on average on MoE.
Specifically, not only does S PECTRA perform much better
for low reconfiguration cost δ, but also its makespan grows
slower as δ grows. This is because BASELINE tries to optimize
for a minimal number of nonzero elements to each switch’s
sub-workload demand matrix, but this optimization does not
directly minimize the number of reconfigurations and does not
necessarily translate into a lower makespan. Using E CLIPSE
for the D ECOMPOSE step achieves close results with the
GPT workload due to its well-structured and double-stochastic
matrix, but performs much worse with the denser and substochastic MoE matrix. That is, the E CLIPSE-based variant of
S PECTRA performs 1.1× worse on average for GPT, and 1.8×
worse on average for MoE. Finally, S PECTRA appears as close
to optimal, since it is close to the lower bound (LB), especially
with the MoE workload where it is indistinguishable, maybe
because it can focus on the few columns of highest-weight
destination experts (Fig. 5). In summary, the results show that
S PECTRA performs well on both sparse and dense matrices,
which highlights its flexibility.
Fig. 7 analyzes the sensitivity of S PECTRA to its equalization component. We can see that when we need to schedule the
dense and near-uniform MoE traffic with many small elements
2 Datacenter switches typically use specialized network processors or
ASICS, so S PECTRA runtimes can be much faster in practice.

8

(a) GPT with n = 32.

(b) MoE with n = 64.

Fig. 6.

Performance with AI training workloads given varying reconfiguration delay δ, with GPT and MoE workloads and two different numbers s of OCSes.

Fig. 7.

Sensitivity to equalization with AI training workloads, comparing S PECTRA with and without equalization.

(a) GPT with n = 32.

(b) MoE with n = 64.

(a) GPT with n = 32.
Fig. 8.

(b) MoE with n = 64.

Sensitivity to noise with AI training workload: Comparison of S PECTRA variants with noise standard deviations 0.3% and 1%.

(Fig. 7(b)), it is relatively easy to spread the traffic, and
therefore equalization does not help. However, as we use the
GPT traffic with large elements (Fig. 7(a)), the elements need
to be split, and equalization makes a significant difference.

performance,

Fig. 8 presents the impact of added noise on the performance of S PECTRA and S PECTRA with E CLIPSE in the
AI training workloads. It plots the result of having a small
noise added to all non-zero elements (of standard deviation
σ = 0.3%, plotted in gray) vs. having a larger noise (σ = 1%,
plotted with usual colors). The 0.3% noise is already added
in the initial GPT workload, while we add it specifically in
the MoE workload for the comparison. The GPT initial traffic
matrix is more regular and doubly stochastic, and therefore we
can see that noise has a slightly negative impact, especially for
s = 4. On the contrary, MoE traffic is strongly sub-stochastic,
so the noise can in fact make it less skewed and improve the

Fig. 9 compares S PECTRA against alternatives on the benchmark workload. S PECTRA vastly outperforms BASELINE, with
a 2.4× shorter schedule on average. Using E CLIPSE for the
D ECOMPOSE step always yields worse results, and S PECTRA
performs better than E CLIPSE with a 1.2× shorter schedule
on average. S PECTRA also appears quite close to the lower
bound, and therefore, to optimality.
Fig. 10 analyzes the sensitivity of the algorithms to a
varying number m of outgoing flows per port, and therefore
to a varying sparsity of the matrix D, given reconfiguration
delay δ = 0.04. S PECTRA is flexible enough to adapt to
these differing sparsity patterns, again vastly outperforming

C. Benchmark Workload

9

The authors would like to thank Ori Cohen for providing the
MoE measurements, and Mark Silberstein and Jose Yallouz for
their assistance in coordinating the necessary resources. This
work was partly supported by the Louis and Miriam Benjamin
Chair in Computer-Communication Networks and NSF Award
No. 2410053.

[3] J. Lu, J. Gao, F. Feng, Z. He, M. Zheng, K. Liu, J. He, B. Liao, S. Xu,
K. Sun et al., “Alibaba Stellar: A new generation RDMA network for
cloud AI,” in ACM SIGCOMM, 2025, pp. 453–466.
[4] K. Qian, Y. Xi, J. Cao, J. Gao, Y. Xu, Y. Guan, B. Fu, X. Shi,
F. Zhu, R. Miao et al., “Alibaba HPN: A data center network for large
language model training,” in Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2024
Conference, 2024, pp. 691–706.
[5] Y. Feng, T. Chen, Y. Wei, S. Shen, S. Wang, W. Li, K. Ma, and T. Hoefler, “RailX: a flexible, scalable, and low-cost network architecture for
hyper-scale LLM training systems,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.18889,
2025.
[6] S. Bojja Venkatakrishnan, M. Alizadeh, and P. Viswanath, “Costly
circuits, submodular schedules and approximate carathéodory theorems,”
Queueing Systems, vol. 88, no. 3, pp. 311–347, 2018.
[7] H. Liu et al., “Scheduling techniques for hybrid circuit/packet networks,”
in ACM CoNEXT, 2015, pp. 1–13.
[8] N. Farrington et al., “Helios: a hybrid electrical/optical switch architecture for modular data centers,” in ACM SIGCOMM, vol. 40, no. 4, 2010,
pp. 339–350.
[9] L. Liu, J. J. Xu, and M. Singh, “LESS: A matrix split and balance
algorithm for parallel circuit (optical) or hybrid data center switching
and more,” in IEEE/ACM Utility and Cloud Computing (UCC), 2019.
[10] C. Liang et al., “NegotiaToR: towards a simple yet effective on-demand
reconfigurable datacenter network,” in ACM SIGCOMM, 2024.
[11] Y. Zu, A. Ghaffarkhah, H.-V. Dang, B. Towles, S. Hand, S. Huda,
A. Bello, A. Kolbasov, A. Rezaei, D. Du et al., “Resiliency at scale:
Managing {Google’s}{TPUv4} machine learning supercomputer,” in
Usenix NSDI, 2024, pp. 761–774.
[12] F. De Marchi, J. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Bai, and Y. Xia, “Unlocking superior
performance in reconfigurable data center networks with credit-based
transport,” in ACM SIGCOMM, 2025, pp. 842–860.
[13] V. Addanki et al., “Vermilion: A traffic-aware reconfigurable optical interconnect with formal throughput guarantees,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.09892, 2025.
[14] K. Liang, L. Qiao, I. Keslassy, and B. Lin, “Scheduling parallel optical
switches in datacenters,” IEEE Networking Letters, 2026.
[15] X. Li and M. Hamdi, “On scheduling optical packet switches with
reconfiguration delay,” IEEE JSAC, vol. 21, no. 7, pp. 1156–1164, 2003.
[16] A. Schrijver, Combinatorial Optimization: Polyhedra and Efficiency, ser.
Algorithms and Combinatorics. Berlin: Springer, 2003, vol. 24, no. 2.
[17] R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin, Network Flows: Theory,
Algorithms, and Applications. Prentice Hall, 1993.
[18] P. Bergé, M. Chaikovskaia, J.-P. Gayon, and A. Quilliot, “Approximation
algorithms for job scheduling with reconfigurable resources,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.00419, 2023.
[19] A. Radford, J. Wu, R. Child, D. Luan, D. Amodei, I. Sutskever et al.,
“Language models are unsupervised multitask learners,” OpenAI blog,
vol. 1, no. 8, p. 9, 2019.
[20] W. Li, X. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Jin, H. Tian, Z. Zhong, G. Liu, Y. Zhang, and
K. Chen, “Understanding communication characteristics of distributed
training,” in Proceedings of the 8th Asia-Pacific Workshop on Networking, 2024, pp. 1–8.
[21] “Megatron-DeepSpeed,” https://github.com/microsoft/Megatron-DeepS
peed.
[22] R. Jonker and A.Volgenant, “A shortest augmenting path algorithm for
dense and sparse linear assignment problems,” Computing, vol. 38, no. 4,
pp. 325–340, 1987.
[23] D. F. Crouse, “On implementing 2D rectangular assignment algorithms,”
IEEE Transactions on Aerospace and Electronic Systems, vol. 52, no. 4,
pp. 1679–1696, 2016.
[24] S. Renganathan and N. McKeown, “Chronos: Prescheduled circuit
switching for LLM training,” in Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on
Networks for AI Computing, 2025, pp. 89–97.
[25] S. Gandhi and C. Kozyrakis, “MoEtion: Efficient and reliable checkpointing for mixture-of-experts models at scale,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.15411, 2024.

R EFERENCES

A PPENDIX

[1] X. Liao, Y. Sun, H. Tian, X. Wan, Y. Jin, Z. Wang, Z. Ren, X. Huang,
W. Li, K. F. Tse et al., “MixNet: A runtime reconfigurable opticalelectrical fabric for distributed mixture-of-experts training,” in ACM
SIGCOMM, 2025, pp. 554–574.
[2] A. Gangidi, R. Miao, S. Zheng, S. J. Bondu, G. Goes, H. Morsy, R. Puri,
M. Riftadi, A. J. Shetty, J. Yang et al., “RDMA over Ethernet for
distributed training at Meta scale,” in ACM SIGCOMM, 2024, pp. 57–70.

Sum of k random weighted permutations. We focus on
the case where the n × n demand matrix D is the sum of k
random weighted permutations, as in the benchmark workload
in the evaluations (before noise is added). We want to show
that for a large enough n, it is highly likely that D’s degree

Fig. 9.

Benchmark workload.

Fig. 10. Sensitivity to sparsity with baseline workload, with varying number
of flows.

BASELINE. Using an E CLIPSE decomposition step never helps
S PECTRA.
VI. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we showed how the increasing network
demands in AI datacenters could be serviced by a set of
parallel OCSes, in which we want to minimize the makespan.
We then explained how S PECTRA can schedule a demand
matrix D over s parallel switches using three steps: D E COMPOSE , S CHEDULE and E QUALIZE. Our evaluation of
S PECTRA shows that it vastly outperforms BASELINE by an
average factor of 1.4× on GPT AI workloads, 1.9× on MoE
AI workloads, and 2.4× on standard benchmarks.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

10

(a) k varies, given n = 100

(b) n varies, given k = 16

Fig. 11. Probability that an n × n matrix D that is the sum of k random
weighted permutations also has degree k.

is k, meaning there is at least one row or column with exactly
k nonzero elements, and therefore we can apply the lower
bounds of §IV to some row/column i using the parameter k.
We start by proving a property of a single row or column of
D.
Proposition 1. If D is defined as the sum of k random
weighted permutations, then the probability p that there are
exactly k nonzero elements in a given row or column of D is
p=

n!
(n − k)! · nk

(9)

Proof: Consider k colored balls that each randomly
choose one of n bins. p is the probability that they end up in
distinct bins. It is the division of the number n · (n − 1) · · · · ·
n!
(n − k + 1) = (n−k)!
of possible choices for the placement
of the balls such that they get in distinct bins, by the total
number nk of possible placements.
We now build a model that approximates the probability that
D has degree k. This model considers all rows and columns
of n as i.i.d. for this approximation.
Proposition 2. If D is defined as the sum of k random
weighted permutations, then the probability that its degree is
k (and therefore the lower bounds for i hold with k nonzero
elements) can be approximated as:

2n
n!
1− 1−
.
(10)
(n − k)! · nk
Proof: We approximate the 2n rows and columns as i.i.d.,
with a probability p that any given row or column has k
nonzero elements. Then the probability that at least one row
or column has k nonzero elements is 1 − (1 − p)2n .
Fig. 11(a) illustrates the simulated probability that the
degree of D is k in a 100 × 100 matrix D that is the
sum of k random weighted permutations. It shows that the
approximation is close. Fig. 11(b) shows the same probability
for a sum of 16 permutations, as D’s size n varies. Again,
the approximation holds well. Moreover, for n beyond 50, it
is highly likely that its degree will be 16.

