https://arxiv.org/html/2601.20858v1
When Flores Bloomz Wrong: Cross-Direction Contaminationin Machine Translation Evaluation
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Experimental Setup
Test set and Models
3 Contamination in Machine Translation
3.1 Is there contamination?
Memorization not generalization
Disentangling source and target
3.2 Is the recall due to the exact source input?
Results
3.3 What features contribute to the recall?
Results
4 Is contamination occurring cross-directionally?
Results
5 Conclusion
6 Limitations
7 Ethical Considerations
References
A Related Work
B PMIndia and Maan-ki-Baat BLEU Scores
C Fine-tuning Parameters
D Computing Infrastructure
E Use of AI Assistants
F Fine-tuned and Base Llama BLEU and COMET Heatmaps
G Examples of Llama Back-Translations
H Examples of Entity Replaced Sentences
I Entity Descriptions
J Prompts
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2601.20858v1 [cs.CL] 28 Jan 2026
When Flores Bloomz Wrong: Cross-Direction Contamination
in Machine Translation Evaluation
David Tan
Affiliation: Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus
Email: data00003@stud.uni-saarland.de
Pinzhen Chen
Affiliation: Queen’s University Belfast
Affiliation: University of Edinburgh
Josef van Genabith
Affiliation: Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus
Affiliation: German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI)
Koel Dutta Chowdhury
Affiliation: Saarland University, Saarland Informatics Campus
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) can be benchmark-contaminated, resulting in inflated scores that mask memorization as generalization, and in multilingual settings, this memorization can even transfer to “uncontaminated” languages. Using the FLORES-200 translation benchmark as a diagnostic, we study two 7–8B instruction-tuned multilingual LLMs: Bloomz, which was trained on FLORES, and Llama as an uncontaminated control.
We confirm Bloomz’s FLORES contamination and demonstrate that machine translation contamination can be cross-directional, artificially boosting performance in unseen translation directions due to target-side memorization.
Further analysis shows that recall of memorized references often persists despite various source-side perturbation efforts like paraphrasing and named entity replacement.
However, replacing named entities leads to a consistent decrease in BLEU, suggesting an effective probing method for memorization in contaminated models.
1 Introduction
††
Code at github.com/Mr-Ao-25/cross-ling-contamination.
Large language models (LLMs) typically go through pre-training and fine-tuning stages to become applicable to downstream tasks, where data is a fundamental building block. Despite this, details about training data are often too vague to infer useful information, both for open- and closed-source models. This has negative implications for LLM research, one of which is the reliability of using public benchmarks to evaluate model performance. LLM training data is typically in the magnitude of billions to trillions of tokens (Gao et al., 2020; Hoffmann et al., 2022). Consequently, public test sets may inadvertently be incorporated into training data (Sainz et al., 2024) and artificially boost scores—a phenomenon referred to as data contamination (Magar and Schwartz, 2022). The problem is even more pressing in multilingual evaluation, where contamination can cross-lingually transfer into languages not seen before (Yao et al., 2024).
This work uses machine translation as a diagnostic task to investigate cross-direction data contamination: the artificial boost of unseen language pair scores, resulting from training on language pairs with the same target.
We use FLORES200 (NLLB et al., 2022), a test suite that supports hundreds of languages with multiway parallelism, yet this wide coverage increases the likelihood of contamination. We explore whether its multiway parallel structure may result in cross-direction transfer of train-test leakage.
We benchmark Bloomz-7B1 (Muennighoff et al., 2023), a multilingual LLM with FLORES documented as part of its fine-tuning data, and compare it to Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024)
which is reportedly clean. Compared to Kocyigit et al. (2025)’s focus on the contribution of source or target-side text during training, we probe cross-direction contamination in machine translation at inference, specifically whether altered source inputs can still trigger memorized targets.
We analyze patterns of contamination through controlled studies and design perturbation-based tests to probe how contamination manifests. We present three findings:
1.
We show that contamination happens cross-directionally for machine translation, where contaminated LLMs can perform moderately well in unseen translation directions, mainly due to target-side language memorization.
2.
While it is assumed that train-test source input similarity leads to patterns of contamination, we demonstrate that a not-so-similar input may still lead to a model calling memorized text.
3.
We discover that replacing named entities consistently decreases BLEU, suggesting an effective method for probing memorization.
Figure 1: BLEU for Bloomz (upper left), Llama (lower left) and COMET for Bloomz (upper right), Llama (lower right). All plots have the same sources, targets, and color bar with a blue-red gradient (low-to-high).
2 Experimental Setup
Test set and Models
We use FLORES200 (NLLB et al., 2022, or FLORES) as our test set for its wide language coverage and multi-way parallelism. We use the dev set of 997 samples and evaluate the model’s initial generation for each sample. We select 15 languages spanning different resource levels—high-resourced: English (eng), Simplified Chinese (zho), Spanish (spa), Portuguese (por), French (fra), and Vietnamese (vie); medium-resourced: Malayalam (mal), Tamil (tam), Assamese (asm), and Odia (ory); low-resourced: Bambara (bam), Fon (fon), Ewe (ewe), Kikuyu (kik), and Maori (mri). Notably, Bloomz has not been trained on ewe and mri.
We investigate various aspects of contamination using bloomz-7b1 (Muennighoff et al., 2023, Bloomz) and Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct (Grattafiori et al., 2024, Llama).
Both models are instruction-tuned, similarly sized (7–8B parameters), and designed for multilingual text generation, making them broadly comparable in their cross-lingual capabilities. While Bloomz was explicitly trained on FLORES with unspecified translation directions, there is no reported use of FLORES in the training of Llama.
For entity replacement experiments, we use aya-expanse-8b (Dang et al., 2024, Aya).
3 Contamination in Machine Translation
3.1 Is there contamination?
We first investigate whether Bloomz and Llama have memorized FLORES. We run an evaluation on FLORES for every source-target pair formed by our 15 chosen languages.
We use BLEU implemented in sacrebleu (Post, 2018; Papineni et al., 2002) as a measure of surface form overlap w.r.t. the reference, rather than translation quality, and COMET-22-DA (Rei et al., 2022) for semantic similarity. As our diagnostic, we take that an unreasonably high BLEU coupled with high COMET (e.g. 80 BLEU, 0.9 COMET) would imply contamination, while a reasonable BLEU with a high COMET score (e.g. 40 BLEU, 0.9 COMET) would indicate a good performance without contamination (or with less likelihood of it). Low BLEU and COMET indicate divergence in both form and meaning; moderate BLEU with high COMET reflects semantic similarity despite surface variation.
Figure 1 presents BLEU and COMET heatmaps for Bloomz and Llama.
For Bloomz, we see oddly high BLEU (40–90) in xxx→\to{eng, fra, mal, ory, por, tam, vie, zho}, hinting at contamination; medium BLEU scores (≤\leq 50) in xxx→\to{asm, spa}; and very low scores (≈\approx 0) in xxx→\to{bam, ewe, fon, kik, mri}. COMET scores generally follow trends seen in BLEU; language pairs with medium to high BLEU achieve >> 0.8 COMET; low BLEU language pairs achieve ≤0.5\leq 0.5 – 0.65 COMET.
In contrast, Llama shows little evidence of contamination: reasonably high BLEU scores (30–40) only appear in a few high-resource languages or directions, and COMET scores are only high (≥\geq 0.8) when BLEU scores are >>15. For Bloomz, high COMET (≥\geq 0.8) results from ≥\geq 35 BLEU.
Memorization not generalization
To rule out the possibility that Bloomz simply has superb performance in those directions with high BLEU, we test the relatively low-resource eng→\to{mal, ory, tam} available in PMIndia Haddow and Kirefu (2020) and Mann-ki-Baat Jain et al. (2024).
Appendix B Table 2 shows near-zero BLEU scores for both datasets, indicating that Bloomz cannot translate those directions, adding further evidence of FLORES contamination.
Disentangling source and target
We study the pattern of contamination when a language is placed on the source or target side. Figure 1 shows that when placed on the target side, a handful of languages have a “clean” column: bam, ewe, fon, kik, and mri, with BLEU ≈\approx 0.
In contrast, when placed on the source side, a few languages that did not exhibit contamination signals as the target (bam, fon, kik) now have medium-range BLEU scores across their rows. Overall, no single language as a source can escape contamination: even ewe and mri that are not supported by Bloomz achieve >>10 BLEU into a few target languages, higher than Llama. This suggests that contamination manifests itself asymmetrically in terms of whether a language is at the source or target side: inflated scores are due to the memorization of the target language text.
3.2 Is the recall due to the exact source input?
We investigate whether Bloomz’ recall of the memorized target is due to seeing the exact source string paired with the target.
For all xxx→\toyyy translation directions, we utilize a back-translated source, xxxzzz, originating from a third language zzz; this is essentially done by Llama in zzz→\toxxx directions in Section 3.1.
FLORES’ multiway parallelism ensures that the back-translated source remains parallel to the original target reference, while staying different from the original source.
We try three originating languages zzz={asm, bam, por}, for which Llama had distinct translation performance (into any xxx): xxxbam are near-zero BLEU, xxxasm are in the 10–20 range, and xxxpor are in the 20–50 range.
These scores are shown in Llama’s heatmap in Figure 1.
Specifically, we experiment with all chosen languages, except {por, bam, asm}, as source xxx.
The target language is fixed to tam, which exhibited the highest degree of target-side memorization. This forms three test directions: {xxxpor, xxxasm, xxxbam}→\totam.
We also utilize a paraphrased source generated by Llama denoted as xxxpp to compare against the Llama back-translated xxxzzz. We test high-resource source languages into tam: xxxpp →\to tam and compare it against xxxpor →\to tam. We also assess the similarity between the altered sources and the original source denoted as xxxog: {xxxpor, xxxpp} →\to xxxog.
Figure 2: Bloomz’s BLEU for {xxxpor, xxxbam, xxxasm}→\totam. Llama back-translated {por, bam, asm} into xxx{por, bam, asm}.
Figure 3: BLEU scores for Llama (left) and Bloomz (right) across language pairs under different entity replacement settings (Base, One Entity, All Entities).
Results
Figure 2 presents Bloomz’ performance in translating back-translated source.
Generally, the BLEU scores of xxxsrc→\totam align with the performance of Llama when producing the back-translations (xxxpor, xxxbam, xxxasm).
When Llama’s back-translation is in the 20–50 BLEU range, Bloomz’ translation has a high >>60 BLEU, as exhibited in {vie, spa, fra, eng, zho}por→\totam. When the string overlap between the back-translated and original sources is lower (10–20 BLEU), Bloomz gets a moderate 45–50 BLEU as exhibited in {vie, spa, fra, eng, zho}asm→\totam.
Unexpected results are observed in a few back-translated sources with close to 0
BLEU (i.e. {ory, kik, mal}{por, asm}).
Given these back-translated sources, Bloomz still yield 20–60 BLEU, indicating moderate to high recall of memorized targets.
In other cases, where the back-translated source has poor BLEU w.r.t. the original source, memorized target recall is minimal, as shown in other low-resource sources from por or asm, as well as in all xxxbam→\totam.
Table 1 presents the paraphrased scores compared against the back-translated scores. Despite the paraphrased sources having higher surface form overlap with the original, the back-translated sources score 20–30 BLEU higher for all pairs. Our results suggest that the exact source is the culprit, but even a not-so-similar back-translated or paraphrased input does not guarantee a low recall, indicating that some aspect of the source functions as a ”trigger” for recall.
3.3 What features contribute to the recall?
We investigate the curious case above, where back-translated sources still lead to recall of memorized target.
First, we manually inspect Llama’s back-translations (refer to Table 4 in appendix G) and observe that even when they diverge from the original sources significantly, named entities are still retained. To investigate whether named entities contribute to recall, we create new entities to replace those in the original using six high resource languages (eng, fra, por, spa, vie, zho) and observe how the recall of memorized targets varies, using Bloomz’ and Llama’s BLEU scores.
Figure 4: The BLEU (left) and COMET (right) difference between the finetuned and base Llama model. Positive/negative indicates increases/decreases in the fine-tuned model compared to the base model.
To ensure that the same named entities are identified and labeled for every language, we use spaCy (Honnibal et al., 2020) to first identify named entities for every sentence and manually edit any missing or incorrectly labeled entities. Given the English source and its corresponding list of entities, we use Aya to create new entities to replace the original and translate the new entities into every high resource language. For entity types, descriptions, and examples of entity-replaced sentences, refer to Table 5 and Table 6.
In total, FLORES contains around 640 sentences with entities for our chosen languages.
We experiment with two replacement settings, one-entity and all-entities, and compare against the original for each language pair.
For the one-entity setting, sentences with multiple entities result in multiple variants, from which one is chosen randomly. The all-entities setting replaces every entity in a sentence. We then score BLEU for each language pair against the original reference to measure recall of memorized text.
eng
fra
spa
vie
zho
xxxpor →\to tam
82.9282.92
87.2887.28
87.2487.24
79.3879.38
72.8172.81
xxxpp →\to tam
64.6064.60
66.5566.55
61.1561.15
62.1862.18
53.6753.67
xxxpor →\to xxxog
47.8347.83
35.3535.35
23.4123.41
30.7530.75
30.8430.84
xxxpp →\to xxxog
53.0353.03
60.9260.92
54.3854.38
62.6062.60
61.1161.11
Table 1: {xxxpor, xxxpp} →\to tam evaluated by Bloomz and the perturbed sources compared against the original source: {xxxpor, xxxpp} →\to xxxog
Results
Figure 3 shows the changes in BLEU for both models when entity replacement is applied. Generally, results indicate that replacing entities in source texts are associated with a reduced level of recall. Bloomz results in a reduction of 5-10 BLEU for single entity replacement and 10-20 BLEU for all entity replacement. Llama experiences an average decrease of about 5 BLEU for the one-entity setting and about 10 for the all-entities setting, with certain pairs decreasing by up to 15 BLEU.
For each target language, the relative ordering of scores across language pairs is largely preserved, confirming that target-side memorization remains the primary factor. However, the consistent BLEU drop makes entity replacement a potentially effective method for probing memorization in parallel datasets like FLORES.
4 Is contamination occurring cross-directionally?
To investigate whether the multilingual nature of FLORES inadvertently causes cross-direction contamination during training, we perform fine-tuning experiments with FLORES eng ↔\leftrightarrow xxx data in 11 languages
{eng, fra, tam, vie, mri, zho, Xhosa (xho), Japanese (jpn), German (deu), Tagalog (fil), Swahili (swa)}
using Axolotl.11
1
github.com/axolotl-ai-cloud/axolotl For the given languages, xxx, yyy, and zzz, we define cross-direction contamination as the artificial boost in scores of unseen translation directions (zzz →\to yyy) due to the memorization of yyy in seen translation directions (xxx →\to yyy). Although exact translation directions used for model training are rarely specified, it is reasonable to assume English is used as both source and target.
We fine-tune Llama until it severely memorizes the eng ↔\leftrightarrow xxx data to mirror the level of memorization observed in Bloomz (refer to Table 3 for fine-tuning parameters).
Using the fine-tuned model, we translate every source-target pair for the 11 languages and evaluate using BLEU and COMET.
Results
Figure 4 presents the BLEU and COMET differences between the fine-tuned and base models (refer to Figure 5 for full scores).
In general, BLEU scores for most unseen language pairs increased up to 16 points, the exceptions being xxx →\to {vie, swa}. As for eng ↔\leftrightarrow xxx, the gains in xxx →\to eng overshadow the gains in eng →\to xxx reinforcing target side memorization.
Concerning source and target memorization, we observe trends mirroring Bloomz. Although xho yielded low BLEU scores as a target, its effectiveness as a source was similar to other languages.
Likewise, xxx →\to {vie, swa} showed decreases with most sources, but performed
similarly to other languages when used as sources, reinforcing that contamination is due to target-side memorization.
Conversely, the trends in COMET contradict the overall increases in BLEU. Outside of xxx →\to {mri, xho}, COMET scores decreased for all pairs. We conjecture this is due to the extreme memorization of some samples, leading to increased overall BLEU scores at the cost of the non-memorized samples. Regarding the exceptions {mri, xho}, we surmise that they could not deteriorate further, as the BLEU and COMET in the base model already indicated little similarity with the reference.
5 Conclusion
We verified that Bloomz is FLORES-contaminated, using Llama as an uncontaminated control, and demonstrate through fine-tuning Llama with FLORES eng↔\leftrightarrow xxx pairs that contamination is cross-directional, driven by target-side memorization.
We further show that back-translated and paraphrased sources do not necessarily reduce the recall of memorized references. We found that replacing named entities leads to a consistent decrease in BLEU, suggesting an effective method for probing memorization in potentially contaminated models. We recommend that practitioners verify contamination across translation directions when evaluating on multiway parallel benchmarks.
Acknowledgment
We thank Barry Haddow for his comment on paraphrasing the Flores input. The work received funding from Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German Research Foundation) – SFB 1102 Information Density and Linguistic Encoding.
6 Limitations
Although we gave Aya the source, source entities, and target during entity generation, it is possible that the new entities have different inflection compared to the original entities, changing the sentence more than intended. The drop in BLEU for entity replacement may differ depending on the number of sentences that contain entities. Also, our work yielded empirical conclusions but did not investigate the internal mechanisms of cross-direction contamination or the activation of memorized text. Our experiments are limited to 7-8B parameter models; results may vary for different model sizes. Additionally, our fine-tuning experiments simulate contamination but may not fully replicate contamination that occurs during pre-training.
7 Ethical Considerations
This study sought to uncover various forms of contamination in machine translation tasks. Our work poses no risk to readers, practitioners, or the wider community. All model and data artifacts were used in full compliance with their respective licenses.
References
Carlini et al. (2022)
N. Carlini, D. Ippolito, M. Jagielski, K. Lee, F. Tramer, and C. Zhang
Quantifying memorization across neural language models.
In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations,
Cited by: Appendix A.
Chowdhury et al. (2020)
K. D. Chowdhury, C. España-Bonet, and J. van Genabith
Understanding translationese in multi-view embedding spaces.
In Proceedings of the 28th international conference on computational linguistics,
pp. 6056–6062.
Cited by: Appendix A.
Dang et al. (2024)
J. Dang, S. Singh, D. D’souza, A. Ahmadian, A. Salamanca, M. Smith, A. Peppin, S. Hong, M. Govindassamy, T. Zhao, et al.
Aya expanse: combining research breakthroughs for a new multilingual frontier.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04261.
Cited by: §2.
Dodge et al. (2021)
J. Dodge, M. Sap, A. Marasović, W. Agnew, G. Ilharco, D. Groeneveld, M. Mitchell, and M. Gardner
Documenting large webtext corpora: a case study on the colossal clean crawled corpus.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2104.08758.
Cited by: Appendix A.
Dutta Chowdhury et al. (2021)
K. Dutta Chowdhury, C. España-Bonet, and J. van Genabith
Tracing source language interference in translation with graph-isomorphism measures.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing (RANLP 2021),  R. Mitkov and G. Angelova (Eds.),
Held Online, pp. 375–385.
External Links: Link
Cited by: Appendix A.
Elangovan et al. (2021)
A. Elangovan, J. He, and K. Verspoor
Memorization vs. generalization : quantifying data leakage in NLP performance evaluation.
In Proceedings of the 16th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Main Volume,
Cited by: Appendix A.
Gao et al. (2020)
L. Gao, S. Biderman, S. Black, L. Golding, T. Hoppe, C. Foster, J. Phang, H. He, A. Thite, N. Nabeshima, et al.
The Pile: an 800GB dataset of diverse text for language modeling.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2101.00027.
Cited by: §1.
Grattafiori et al. (2024)
A. Grattafiori, A. Dubey, A. Jauhri, A. Pandey, A. Kadian, A. Al-Dahle, A. Letman, A. Mathur, A. Schelten, A. Vaughan, et al.
The llama 3 herd of models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.21783.
Cited by: §1,
§2.
Guerreiro et al. (2023)
N. M. Guerreiro, E. Voita, and A. Martins
Looking for a needle in a haystack: a comprehensive study of hallucinations in neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 17th Conference of the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Cited by: Appendix A.
Haddow and Kirefu (2020)
B. Haddow and F. Kirefu
PMIndia–a collection of parallel corpora of languages of india.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2001.09907.
Cited by: §3.1.
Hartmann et al. (2023)
V. Hartmann, A. Suri, V. Bindschaedler, D. Evans, S. Tople, and R. West
Sok: memorization in general-purpose large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.18362.
Cited by: Appendix A.
Hoffmann et al. (2022)
J. Hoffmann, S. Borgeaud, A. Mensch, E. Buchatskaya, T. Cai, E. Rutherford, D. de Las Casas, L. A. Hendricks, J. Welbl, A. Clark, et al.
Training compute-optimal large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.15556.
Cited by: §1.
Honnibal et al. (2020)
M. Honnibal, I. Montani, S. Van Landeghem, and A. Boyd
spaCy: Industrial-strength Natural Language Processing in Python.
External Links: Document
Cited by: §3.3.
Jacovi et al. (2023)
A. Jacovi, A. Caciularu, O. Goldman, and Y. Goldberg
Stop uploading test data in plain text: practical strategies for mitigating data contamination by evaluation benchmarks.
In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
Cited by: Appendix A.
Jain et al. (2024)
S. Jain, A. Sankar, D. Choudhary, D. Suman, N. Narasimhan, M. S. U. R. Khan, A. Kunchukuttan, M. M. Khapra, and R. Dabre
BhasaAnuvaad: a speech translation dataset for 14 indian languages.
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2411.04699.
Cited by: §3.1.
Jiang et al. (2024)
M. Jiang, K. Z. Liu, M. Zhong, R. Schaeffer, S. Ouyang, J. Han, and S. Koyejo
Investigating data contamination for pre-training language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.06059.
Cited by: Appendix A.
Kocyigit et al. (2025)
M. Y. Kocyigit, E. Briakou, D. Deutsch, J. Luo, C. Cherry, and M. Freitag
Overestimation in LLM evaluation: a controlled large-scale study on data contamination’s impact on machine translation.
In Forty-second International Conference on Machine Learning,
Cited by: Appendix A,
§1.
Magar and Schwartz (2022)
I. Magar and R. Schwartz
Data contamination: from memorization to exploitation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.08242.
Cited by: Appendix A,
§1.
Muennighoff et al. (2023)
N. Muennighoff, T. Wang, L. Sutawika, A. Roberts, S. Biderman, T. Le Scao, M. S. Bari, S. Shen, Z. X. Yong, H. Schoelkopf, X. Tang, D. Radev, A. F. Aji, K. Almubarak, S. Albanie, Z. Alyafeai, A. Webson, E. Raff, and C. Raffel
Crosslingual generalization through multitask finetuning.
In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers),
Cited by: §1,
§2.
NLLB et al. (2022)
T. NLLB, M. R. Costa-Jussà, J. Cross, O. Çelebi, M. Elbayad, K. Heafield, K. Heffernan, E. Kalbassi, J. Lam, D. Licht, J. Maillard, et al.
No language left behind: scaling human-centered machine translation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.04672.
Cited by: §1,
§2.
Oren et al. (2023)
Y. Oren, N. Meister, N. S. Chatterji, F. Ladhak, and T. Hashimoto
Proving test set contamination in black-box language models.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
Cited by: Appendix A.
Pan et al. (2020)
X. Pan, M. Zhang, S. Ji, and M. Yang
Privacy risks of general-purpose language models.
In 2020 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP),
Cited by: Appendix A.
Papineni et al. (2002)
K. Papineni, S. Roukos, T. Ward, and W. Zhu
Bleu: a method for automatic evaluation of machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 40th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
Cited by: §3.1.
Post (2018)
M. Post
A call for clarity in reporting BLEU scores.
In Proceedings of the Third Conference on Machine Translation: Research Papers,
Cited by: §3.1.
Raunak et al. (2021)
V. Raunak, A. Menezes, and M. Junczys-Dowmunt
The curious case of hallucinations in neural machine translation.
In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies,
Cited by: Appendix A.
Raunak and Menezes (2022)
V. Raunak and A. Menezes
Finding memo: extractive memorization in constrained sequence generation tasks.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2022,
Cited by: Appendix A.
Raunak et al. (2022)
V. Raunak, M. Post, and A. Menezes
SALTED: a framework for salient long-tail translation error detection.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.09988.
Cited by: Appendix A.
Rei et al. (2022)
R. Rei, J. G. C. de Souza, D. Alves, C. Zerva, A. C. Farinha, T. Glushkova, A. Lavie, L. Coheur, and A. F. T. Martins
COMET-22: unbabel-IST 2022 submission for the metrics shared task.
In Proceedings of the Seventh Conference on Machine Translation,
Cited by: §3.1.
Sainz et al. (2024)
I. Sainz, A. Jacovi, J. Ander Campos, Y. Elazar, E. Agirre, Y. Goldberg, W. Chen, J. Chim, L. Choshen, L. D’Amico-Wong, M. Dell, R. Fan, S. Golchin, Y. Li, P. Liu, B. Pahwa, A. Prabhu, S. Sharma, E. Silcock, K. Solonko, D. Stap, M. Surdeanu, Y. Tseng, V. Udandarao, Z. Wang, R. Xu, and J. Yang
Data contamination report from the 2024 CONDA shared task.
In Proceedings of the 1st Workshop on Data Contamination (CONDA),
Cited by: §1.
Shi et al. (2024)
W. Shi, A. Ajith, M. Xia, Y. Huang, D. Liu, T. Blevins, D. Chen, and L. Zettlemoyer
Detecting pretraining data from large language models.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
Cited by: Appendix A.
Yang et al. (2023)
S. Yang, W. Chiang, L. Zheng, J. E. Gonzalez, and I. Stoica
Rethinking benchmark and contamination for language models with rephrased samples.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.04850.
Cited by: Appendix A.
Yao et al. (2024)
F. Yao, Y. Zhuang, Z. Sun, S. Xu, A. Kumar, and J. Shang
Data contamination can cross language barriers.
In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing,
Cited by: §1.
Zhou et al. (2023)
K. Zhou, Y. Zhu, Z. Chen, W. Chen, W. X. Zhao, X. Chen, Y. Lin, J. Wen, and J. Han
Don’t make your llm an evaluation benchmark cheater.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.01964.
Cited by: Appendix A.
Appendix A Related Work
Recent studies highlighted the severe implications of data contamination and called for increased scrutiny of this issue (Pan et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2023; Jacovi et al., 2023; Dodge et al., 2021). LLMs exhibit substantial memorization capabilities (Elangovan et al., 2021; Hartmann et al., 2023; Carlini et al., 2022), raising concerns that benchmark gains may reflect leakage rather than generalization. To address this, prior work proposed both post hoc detection (Shi et al., 2024; Oren et al., 2023) and controlled experiments where models are deliberately trained with test data to measure their effects (Jiang et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2023; Magar and Schwartz, 2022).
In machine translation (MT), memorization and contamination manifest differently. Raunak et al. (2021) documented that hallucinations often arise from memorized artifacts. Raunak and Menezes (2022) showed the phenomenon of extractive memorization, where models reproduce target segments after partial source exposure. Raunak et al. (2022) linked memorizing rare patterns to long-tail translation errors. Guerreiro et al. (2023) provided a systematic analysis of hallucinations, showing how memorization failures scale across multilingual settings. Chowdhury et al. (2020); Dutta Chowdhury et al. (2021) demonstrated that translation artifacts manifest as detectable patterns in embedding spaces. More recently, Kocyigit et al. (2025) conducted controlled pre-training and found that accidental inclusion of evaluation examples in pre-training corpora critically undermines validity. Taken together, prior research has focused on contamination and memorization in monolingual or bilingual MT. To our knowledge, our work is the first to systematically examine cross-lingual contamination in MT, demonstrating that memorization in the target language can artificially boost performance in translating many source languages.
Appendix B PMIndia and Maan-ki-Baat BLEU Scores
Test set
eng→\tomal
eng→\toory
eng→\totam
FLORES
75.4475.44
69.2169.21
87.5587.55
PMIndia
0.120.12
1.851.85
0.110.11
Mann-ki-Baat
0.260.26
1.011.01
0.820.82
Table 2: Bloomz’s BLEU for eng→\to{mal, ory, tam}.
Appendix C Fine-tuning Parameters
base_model: meta-llama/Meta-Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
model_config:
attention_dropout: 0.1
sequence_len: 512
sample_packing: true
pad_to_sequence_len: true
num_epochs: 3
micro_batch_size: 4
gradient_accumulation_steps: 8
learning_rate: 5e-6
weight_decay: 0.05
warmup_ratio: 0.02
lr_scheduler: cosine
max_grad_norm: 0.25
optim: adamw_torch
deepspeed: deepspeed_configs/zero3_bf16.json
torch_distributed_type: DEEPSPEED
Table 3: Fine-tuning Parameters
Appendix D Computing Infrastructure
All experiments were conducted on a single NVIDIA A100 GPU (80GB). Total compute time: approximately 30 GPU-hours. Translation inference with Bloomz and Llama, as well as fine-tuning Llama were performed on this setup.
Appendix E Use of AI Assistants
AI assistants were used for editing prose and debugging code. All scientific claims, experimental design, and analysis were conducted by the authors.
Appendix F Fine-tuned and Base Llama BLEU and COMET Heatmaps
Figure 5: BLEU scores for the fine-tuned Llama (upper left), base Llama (lower left) and COMET scores for the fine-tuned Llama (upper right) and base Llama (lower right).
Appendix G Examples of Llama Back-Translations
Table 4: Examples of Llama’s back-translated source (with English translations from Google Translate).
Appendix H Examples of Entity Replaced Sentences
Table 5: Examples of entity replaced sentences.
Appendix I Entity Descriptions
CARDINAL
Numerals that do not fall under another type
DATE
Absolute or relative dates or periods
EVENT
Named hurricanes, battles, wars, sports events, etc.
FAC
Buildings, airports, highways, bridges, etc.
GPE
Countries, cities, states
LANGUAGE
Any named language
LAW
Named documents made into laws.
LOC
Non-GPE locations, mountain ranges, bodies of water
MONEY
Monetary values, including unit
NORP
Nationalities or religious or political groups
ORDINAL
”first”, ”second”, etc.
ORG
Companies, agencies, institutions, etc.
PERCENT
Percentage, including “%”
PERSON
People, including fictional
PRODUCT
Objects, vehicles, foods, etc. (not services)
QUANTITY
Measurements, as of weight or distance
TIME
Times smaller than a day
WORK_OF_ART
Titles of books, songs, etc.
MISC
Miscellaneous entities, e.g. events, nationalities, products or works of art
Table 6: Description of each Entity
Appendix J Prompts
f"{{{sent}}}\nCan you translate this to tgt_lang?"
Table 7: Prompt for translation with Bloomz.
{
"role": "system",
"content": "You are a helpful assistant that translates text. Your task is to translate a sentence that will be provided."
},
{
"role": "user",
"content": f"Translate the following {src_name} sentence to {tgt_name}. Your response should contain only the translation and be structured like this: {{{{Your response goes here}}}}\n{sent}"
}
Table 8: Prompt for translation with Llama.
f"You are a native {lang_name} speaker.\n"
f"Task: Rephrase the following {lang_name} sentence.\n"
f"Constraints:\n"
f"- Output only one sentence.\n"
f"- Do not include explanations, notes, or formatting.\n"
f"- Do not repeat the input.\n"
f"- Do not add any extra characters or line breaks.\n\n"
f"Input:\n{src}\n\n"
f"Output:"
Table 9: Prompt for paraphrasing with Llama.
{
"role": "user",
"content": (
f"You will be given a parallel English sentence and its corresponding "
f"{tgt_name} sentence. The labeled named entities of the English sentence "
"will be provided.\n\n"
"Your task:\n"
"- For each English entity, identify the exact surface form in the "
f"{tgt_name} sentence that refers to the same real-world entity.\n"
"- DO NOT add new entities.\n"
"- The number of returned entities and the labels MUST match the English list.\n"
"- Return each entity span exactly as it appears in the target sentence.\n"
"- If an English entity appears multiple times, include all of them.\n"
"- If the English entity list is empty, return an empty list: []\n\n"
"Your output MUST be valid JSON ONLY, with this exact structure:\n\n"
"{\n"
f’  "entities_{tgt_lang_code}": [\n’
’    {"label": "ENTITY_LABEL", "text": "ENTITY_IN_TARGET_LANGUAGE", "eng": "ENTITY_IN_ENGLISH"}\n’
"  ]\n"
"}\n\n"
f"English Sentence:\n{src}\n\n"
f"English Entities:\n{ent_eng}\n\n"
f"{tgt_name} Sentence:\n{ref}\n\n"
"Output JSON:"
)
}
Table 10: Prompt for entity alignment with Aya.
{
"role": "user",
"content": (
"You are given a list of named entities in English.\n"
"For each entity, generate a NEW entity of the SAME label type.\n\n"
"RULES:\n"
"- Do NOT add or remove entities.\n"
"- ’new_ent’ must be a completely different real entity from the original.\n"
"- Do NOT use entities found in the original ’text’ value.\n"
"- Synonyms, paraphrases, abbreviations, variants, or anything derived from the original are NOT allowed.\n"
"- The new entity must be real, valid for its label, and not share the same referent.\n"
"- Take the grammar structure of the entity into account if it is multiple words long.\n"
"- Output JSON only.\n\n"
"OUTPUT FORMAT:\n"
"[{\"label\": \"LABEL\", \"text\": \"ORIGINAL_TEXT_FROM_ENTITIES_LIST\", \"new_ent\": \"NEW_ENTITY\"}]\n\n"
f"Entities:{ent_list}\n\n"
"Output JSON only:"
)
}
Table 11: Prompt for new entity generation with Aya.
{
"role": "user",
"content": (
f"Translate the following English *ENTITY* into {tgt_name}.\n\n"
"RULES:\n"
"- Your translation MUST be grammatically correct **for the position the entity occupies** "
"in the target-language sentence.\n"
"- Imagine the translated entity being inserted into the sentence below.\n\n"
"RESTRICTIONS:\n"
"- Translate ONLY the entity.\n"
"- Do NOT output the whole sentence.\n"
"- Do NOT rewrite or paraphrase anything.\n"
"- No explanations.\n"
"- No punctuation or quotes.\n"
"- Output ONLY the final translated entity.\n\n"
f"English Sentence (Original):\n{sources[i]}\n\n"
f"English Sentence After Replacement:\n{eng_replaced_list[i]}\n\n"
f"Target-Language Reference Sentence:\n{references[i]}\n\n"
f"ENTITY TO TRANSLATE:\n{new_ents[i]}\n\n"
"Output ONLY the translated entity:"
)
}
Table 12: Prompt for translating new entities with Aya.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue" (
) button, located in the page header.
Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.
We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.
About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)
Major funding support from
