Graph Tokenization for Bridging Graphs and Transformers
ICLR Proceedings
Search
Graph Tokenization for Bridging Graphs and Transformers
Zeyuan Guo, Enmao Diao, Cheng Yang, Chuan Shi
International Conference on Learning Representations 2026  (ICLR 2026)
Conference
Bibtex
Paper
Supplemental
Abstract
The success of large pretrained Transformers is closely tied to tokenizers, which convert raw input into discrete symbols. Extending these models to graph-structured data remains a significant challenge.  In this work, we introduce a graph tokenization framework that generates sequential representations of graphs by combining reversible graph serialization, which preserves graph information, with Byte Pair Encoding (BPE), a widely adopted tokenizer in large language models (LLMs). To better capture structural information, the graph serialization process is guided by global statistics of graph substructures, ensuring that frequently occurring substructures appear more often in the sequence and can be merged by BPE into meaningful tokens. Empirical results demonstrate that the proposed tokenizer enables Transformers such as BERT to be directly applied to graph benchmarks without architectural modifications. The proposed approach achieves state-of-the-art results on 14 benchmark datasets and frequently outperforms both graph neural networks and specialized graph transformers. This work bridges the gap between graph-structured data and the ecosystem of sequence models. Our code is available at \href{ https://github.com/BUPT-GAMMA/Graph-Tokenization-for-Bridging-Graphs-and-Transformers }{\color{blue}here}.
Name Change Policy
×
Requests for name changes in the electronic proceedings will be accepted with no questions asked.  However name changes may cause bibliographic tracking issues.  Authors are asked to consider this carefully and discuss it with their co-authors prior to requesting a name change in the electronic proceedings.
Use the "Report an Issue" link to request a name change.
Report an Issue
|
Name Change Policy
Do not remove: This comment is monitored to verify that the site is working properly
