AgentRaft: Automated Detection of Data Over-Exposure in LLM Agents
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract.
1 Introduction
2 Background and Problem Statement
2.1 LLM Agent Architecture
2.2 Problem Statement
3 Overview of AgentRaft
3.1 Overall Design
4 Core Design of AgentRaft
4.1 Cross-Tool Function Call Graph Generation
4.1.1 Function Pair Dependency Modeling
4.1.2 Call Edge Generation & Combination
4.2 User Prompt Synthesis
4.2.1 Call Chain Retrieval
4.2.2 User Prompt Instantiation along the Call Chain
4.3 Data Over-Exposure Detection
4.3.1 Taint Data Tracking
4.3.2 Over-Exposure Judging
5 Evaluation
5.1 Evaluation Setup
5.2 RQ1: Overall Effectiveness
5.3 RQ2: Effectiveness of Individual Components
5.4 RQ3: Comparison with Baseline Approach
5.5 RQ4: Performance Overhead
6 Discussion
7 Related Work
8 Conclusion
References
Appendix A Details of AgentRaft
Appendix A.1 Compatible Func Pair Extraction
Appendix A.2 Algorithm of AgentRaft
Appendix A.3 Over-Exposure Judging
Appendix B Evaluation
Appendix B.1 Case Study
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2603.07557v1 [cs.SE] 08 Mar 2026
AgentRaft: Automated Detection of Data Over-Exposure in LLM Agents
Yixi Lin
Note: Both authors contributed equally to this research and are ranked in alphabetical order.
email: linyx98@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Affiliation: Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, China
,
Jiangrong Wu
email: wujr28@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
Affiliation: Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, China
,
Yuhong Nan
Note: Corresponding author.
Affiliation: Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, China
email: nanyh@mail.sysu.edu.cn
,
Xueqiang Wang
Affiliation: University of Central Florida, Orlando, Florida, USA
email: xueqiang.wang@ucf.edu
,
Xinyuan Zhang
Affiliation: Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, China
email: zhangxy797@mail2.sysu.edu.cn
and
Zibin Zheng
Affiliation: Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, Guangdong, China
email: zhzibin@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Abstract.
The rapid integration of Large Language Model (LLM) agents into autonomous task execution has introduced significant privacy concerns within cross-tool data flows. In this paper, we systematically investigate and define a novel risk termed Data Over-Exposure (DOE) in LLM Agent, where an Agent inadvertently transmits sensitive data beyond the scope of user intent and functional necessity. We identify that DOE is primarily driven by the broad data paradigms in tool design and the coarse-grained data processing inherent in LLMs.
In this paper, we present AgentRaft, the first automated framework for detecting DOE risks in LLM agents. AgentRaft combines program analysis with semantic reasoning through three synergistic modules: (1) it constructs a Cross-Tool Function Call Graph (FCG) to model the interaction landscape of heterogeneous tools; (2) it traverses the FCG to synthesize high-quality testing user prompts that act as deterministic triggers for deep-layer tool execution; and (3) it performs runtime taint tracking and employs a multi-LLM voting committee grounded in global privacy regulations (e.g., GDPR, CCPA, PIPL) to accurately identify privacy violations.
We evaluate AgentRaft on a testing environment of 6,675 real-world agent tools. Our findings reveal that DOE is indeed a systemic risk, prevalent in 57.07% of potential tool interaction paths. AgentRaft achieves a high detection accuracy and effectiveness, outperforming baselines by 87.24%. Furthermore, AgentRaft reaches near-total DOE coverage (∼\sim99%) within only 150 prompts while reducing per-chain verification costs by 88.6%. Our work provides a practical foundation for building auditable and privacy-compliant LLM agent systems.
Keywords: LLM Agent Security, Data Over-Exposure, Program Analysis, Cross-tool Data Flow
1. Introduction
The evolution of Large Language Models (LLMs) has catalyzed a paradigm shift in artificial intelligence, transitioning from passive conversationalists to action-oriented agents capable of autonomous task execution (Wang et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024; Fung, 2024). By integrating with external tool ecosystems, these agents serve as a “sophisticated brain,” orchestrating closed-loop workflows that involve interpreting user intentions, planning sub-tasks, and coordinating data flow across diverse components. This capability allows agents to handle complex requests, such as retrieving a file (fil, 2026), extracting specific content, and emailing it to a colleague (ema, 2026), by chaining multiple tool invocations (e.g., read_file →\rightarrow send_email). However, this architectural advancement introduces a complex, multi-stage data flow that inherently heightens the risk of unintended data exposure during autonomous execution.
In this paper, we refer to this privacy risk as Data Over-Exposure (DOE) in LLM Agents, which arises when the agent’s autonomous execution is misaligned with the user’s intention regarding data transmissions.
Our observation is that two inherent characteristics of today’s LLM agent designs make DOEs more likely to occur and persist in near-future LLM agents.
First, Overly broad data provision by tools. In order to support flexibility and task versatility, LLM agents are often designed to receive a broad range of data from the tools they integrate, without explicit consideration of whether the data are strictly necessary for a given task (sometimes, tasks are vaguely defined in prompts, making it difficult for agent developers to determine whether the data are actually required).
Second, Lack of contextual privacy awareness of LLMs.
While LLMs can be tuned to detect sensitivity of individual data points, prior research (Mireshghallah et al., 2023; Li et al., 2025) shows that in real-world contexts of complex tasks they often fail to determine which data should not be exposed, further compounded by inherent model limitations such as hallucinations.
For example, in a real-world LLM Agent app Pokee (ove, 2026a), a user ask an agent to “extract the payment date from a transaction log and email it to an auditor.” While the user only wants to share the date, the upstream tool (read_file) may return a full data schema containing sensitive financial details. At the same time, the LLM fails to enforce a strict data boundary, and inadvertently pass the whole information (including credit card number and cvv) to the downstream tool (send_email), resulting in a privacy violation where a third party receives significantly more data than intended (gdp, 2018; ccp, 2024; pip, 2024).
While similar DOE issues have been discussed in traditional systems such as mobile apps (Wu et al., 2024a; Zuo et al., 2019) and IoT platforms (Nan et al., 2023), detecting such risks in LLM agents poses unique challenges to existing techniques.
For example, prior research (Arzt et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2024a) often analyzes prescribed lines of code of software with deterministic data processing and data flows.
However, in LLM agents, sensitive data usage is driven by dynamic, non-deterministic tool orchestration, where the LLM determines which tools to invoke and how to process data at runtime.
As a result, techniques that rely on modeling data flows from static software code would likely fail, leaving dynamic analysis as the most viable approach to understand and monitor data flows.
Complicating the dynamic analysis of data flows, however, is that, unlike traditional software, where test cases for triggering execution are often available or documented, manually creating a fixed set of test cases for LLM agents is not only time-consuming but also difficult, due to the unconstrained and probabilistic nature of tool executions.
Therefore, the need for a framework that can thoroughly explore the data flows of LLM agents with comprehensive test cases and identify potential privacy issues, such as DOEs, is more urgent than ever before.
Our Work.  In this paper, we propose the first automated, generic framework for detecting data over-exposure risks in LLM agents. In particular, given an Agent, we aim at generating a rich-set of valid user prompts that can fully trigger various tools provided by the agents, and further confirm if there is any potential user un-intended data exposure during the agent usage.
To achieve this goal, we must overcome three primary technical challenges: (1) Comprehensively model agent usage across various tools; (2) Synthesize high-valid user prompts; (3) Observe potential data exposure. First, we need to comprehensively model the interaction landscape across various tools of Agent, as complex tool-to-tool combinations can create hidden data-flow leakage channels. Second, we must synthesize high-valid user prompts that act as deterministic triggers to drive the agent through specific execution paths for valid DOE discovery. Finally, we need to accurately observe potential data exposure and distinguishing between data that is functionally necessary for a tool and data that is genuinely over-exposed.
To address these challenges, we adopt program analysis techniques, specifically call graph construction and data-flow analysis, to build AgentRaft. Our framework formalizes the agent’s tool interactions into a structured execution space and operates through three synergistic stages. First, to address Challenge-1, AgentRaft constructs a Cross-Tool Function Call Graph (FCG) by modeling agent tools as inter-dependent function calls. This stage maps the underlying data-flow dependencies and transitive relationships across various tools and scenarios. Second, to overcome Challenge-2, AgentRaft traverses the FCG to identify reachable execution call chains and synthesizes high-fidelity user prompts. These prompts act as deterministic triggers that drive the agent to execute specific, multi-step tool invocation. Finally, to tackle Challenge-3, AgentRaft performs runtime data-flow tracking during execution. The framework can observe any data transmissions by capturing fine-grained data traces along the call chain. Moreover, to accurately distinguish between functional necessity and over-exposure, AgentRaft implement a multi-LLM voting mechanism grounded in global privacy regulations (GDPR (gdp, 2018), CCPA (ccp, 2024), PIPL (pip, 2024)) to judge whether the transmitted data is strictly required for the task or violates the user’s intent boundaries.
We evaluate AgentRaft by building a testing environment derived from 6,675 real-world tools crawled from MCP.so (mcp, 2026), focusing on four dominant application scenarios: Data Management, Software Development, Enterprise Collaboration, and Social Communication. Our findings reveal that DOE is a systemic and severe risk, with 57.07% of potential tool call chains across all tested domains exhibiting unauthorized sensitive data exposure. At a finer granularity, 65.42% of the total transmitted data fields are identified as over-exposed, highlighting a critical misalignment between current Agent execution patterns and the fundamental principle of data minimization.
From a technical perspective, AgentRaft demonstrates a significant performance over the baseline approaches. Compared to non-guided random search methods which struggle to exceed 20% vulnerability coverage even after 300 attempts, AgentRaft achieves a discovery rate of 69.15% within only 50 prompts and reaches near-total coverage (∼\sim99%) at 150 prompts. Furthermore, our multi-LLM voting mechanism resolves the reasoning bottlenecks of single-model judges, improving DOE identification by 87.24% within 150 prompts and successfully verifying deep-seated risks. Moreover, AgentRaft optimizes auditing economics by reducing per-chain verification costs by 88.6% compared to non-guided baselines, thereby proving the feasibility of large-scale, cost-effective privacy verification for autonomous agents.
AgentRaft provides practical security/privacy benefits for developers, platforms, and end-users. Developers can use the framework to perform systematic privacy vetting to identify and remediate data over-exposure risks before release. This ensures that agents follow the “Data Minimization” principle(gdp, 2018) and protects user privacy from unintended data leaks. Additionally, hosting platforms can use AgentRaft for automated compliance checks to verify that third-party agents adhere to regulations like GDPR and PIPL. By proactively finding these flaws, AgentRaft helps build a more trustworthy and secure agent ecosystem for all users.
Contribution.  In summary, this paper makes the following contributions:
•
We perform the first systematically investigation regarding Data Over-Exposure risk specifically within the cross-tool data flows of LLM Agents. We provide a formal definition of this problem, characterizing it as a violation of the privacy boundary between user-intended data and the execution of LLM Agent.
•
We develop AgentRaft, an automated framework that leverages program analysis to detect DOE risks in LLM Agents. AgentRaft constructs a novel Function Call Graph (FCG) to map tool dependencies and synthesizes precise user prompts to trigger deep-layer execution paths. It then performs runtime data-flow tracking and multi-model auditing to identify privacy violations along the call chain.
•
We conduct an extensive evaluation of AgentRaft with testing environment derived from 6,675 real-world tools across four representative Agent scenarios. Our findings reveal that DOE is a systemic risk prevalent in 57.07% of tool interaction paths. Furthermore, we demonstrate that AgentRaft achieves superior detection efficiency on DOE, proving the practical feasibility and scalability of automated privacy verification for the LLM Agent ecosystem.
2. Background and Problem Statement
2.1. LLM Agent Architecture
A typical LLM agent consists of an LLM integrated with various tools. Given a task, the agent typically follows a “Reasoning-Action-Observation” loop: the LLM first parses the user request to formulate a plan, then autonomously selects and invokes appropriate available tools, and finally observes the returned data to update its internal state or proceed to the next execution step.
LLM Integrations.  Large Language Models (LLMs) serve as the core and logical center of LLM Agents, forming the foundation for autonomous decision-making, task comprehension, and cross-component coordination. The LLM-based brain first performs intention decoding to align autonomous actions with core user requirements through semantic understanding. It subsequently manages task planning and tool orchestration by decomposing complex requests into actionable sub-steps based on functional descriptions. Finally, the model structures tool-returned intermediate data into compatible formats to ensure consistent data flow across the execution chain.
Agent Tools.  An Agent tool is a collection of functions designed to interact with external environments in specific scenarios. These tools serve as the “hands” of the Agent, interacting with external resources and returning raw or processed data to the LLM for subsequent execution steps. Functionally, Agent tools are categorized based on task requirements: information extraction tools retrieve raw data from external sources (e.g., email or web content); data processing tools perform computations or structured queries; and interactive transmission tools deliver results to designated third-party targets.
Figure 1. A typical interaction between Agent tool (function) calls with LLM Reasoning.
Cross-tools Interactions.  Cross-tool interaction in a LLM Agent is characterized by the LLM’s ability to orchestrate sequential function calls and facilitate semantic data transfer between tools. As illustrated in the Figure 1, the LLM acts as a reasoning bridge: it first invokes a retrieval function (e.g., read_file) to obtain raw data, then parses this output to serve as a functional argument for a subsequent tool (e.g., send_email). While this “output-to-input” dependency is fundamental for executing complex, multi-step tasks, it inherently creates a risk of data over-exposure, as private information retrieved at the source may be transmitted to an external sink beyond the user’s original intent.
2.2. Problem Statement
Motivating Example.  Figure 2 presents a real-world DOE case: the Agent inappropriately disclosed the user’s credit card number and CVV to a third-party auditing platform (through read_file -> send_email), despite the user only requesting the transmission of partial information.
Figure 2. Example scenario of data over-exposure in a real-world agent (ove, 2026b).
Definition of DOE.  We formally define Data Over-Exposure specific to LLM Agents to clarify the scope of this research. We define a source function as the initial data retrieval node (e.g., read_file) and a sink function as the terminal node interacting with third parties (e.g., send_email).
DOE occurs when an Agent transmits data to a sink beyond the scope of functionally necessary and user-specified data. Formally, given Dt​o​t​a​lD_{total} (all data retrieved at source), Dt​r​a​n​sD_{trans} (data transmitted to sink), Di​n​tD_{int} (user-intended data), and Dn​e​cD_{nec} (data strictly necessary for the sink’s operation and user intent), the over-exposed data DO​ED_{OE} is defined as:
𝑫𝑶​𝑬=(𝑫𝒕​𝒓​𝒂​𝒏​𝒔∖(𝑫𝒏​𝒆​𝒄∪𝑫𝒊​𝒏​𝒕))∩𝑫𝒕​𝒐​𝒕​𝒂​𝒍D_{OE}=\left(D_{trans}\setminus(D_{nec}\cup D_{int})\right)\cap D_{total}
This formulation ensures that DO​ED_{OE} captures sensitive elements that are neither authorized by the user nor required for the task execution.
Research Goal.  Our primary goal is to develop an automated framework to uncover potential DOE risks in LLM Agents. To achieve this, our research focus on complementing two critical sub-tasks: (i) High-quality User Prompt Generation for exposing potential DOEs, which explores diverse tool combinations by synthesizing targeted user requests to activate specific call chain execution; and (ii) Data Flow Inspection for DOE confirmation, which performs runtime monitoring and data flow tracking to verify whether the transmitted data strictly adheres to the defined Di​n​tD_{int} and Dn​e​cD_{nec} boundaries. By combining structural mapping with dynamic flow analysis, we aim to provide a rigorous auditing solution for the emerging LLM agent ecosystem.
3. Overview of AgentRaft
Challenges and Solutions.
To achieve systematic and in-depth privacy testing of LLM Agent systems, there are three challenges that we need to overcome:
•
C1: Highlighting valid tool usage combinations.
DOE risks are often hidden within the vast space of potential tool combinations. Exhaustively testing all permutations is computationally prohibitive and frequently yields semantically invalid paths. The primary challenge lies in precisely modeling the semantic connectivity between heterogeneous tools to identify valid data dependencies across an expansive interaction space.
Solution: Graph-based function call chain generation. We construct a cross-tool Function Call Graph (FCG) to formalize the Agent’s potential tool interaction landscape. By employing a hybrid strategy of efficiency-driven static type-pruning and precision-oriented LLM validation, we provide a structural blueprint of reachable data-flow channels, ensuring hidden risks in diverse tool combinations are captured.
•
C2: Generating valid prompts along the execution path.
Even with identified dependency tool call chains, the probabilistic nature of LLM decision-making makes guiding an Agent through a specific s​o​u​r​c​e→s​i​n​ksource\rightarrow sink sequence difficult. Standard user prompts often fail to activate complex, multi-step tool chains required for risk validation.
Solution: Call chain-driven prompt synthesis. We transform FCG paths into high-fidelity user prompts by instantiating nodes with specific assets and logical constraints. These prompts serve as deterministic triggers that enforce traversal along intended execution paths, enabling the systematic validation of complex call chains.
•
C3: Distinction between necessary data propagation and data over-exposure.
Identifying privacy violations is non-trivial because the boundary of “necessary data” is dynamic and task-dependent. Transmitted data may exceed the user’s explicit intent (Di​n​tD_{int}) yet remain strictly required for the tool to fulfill the specific task requested by the user (Dn​e​cD_{nec}). Rigid auditing fails to capture this nuance, leading to high false-positive rates.
Solution: Multi-model vote-based auditing. We implement a runtime module utilizing a committee of LLMs to analyze intercepted data (Dt​r​a​n​sD_{trans}) alongside user intent and tool metadata. Guided by global privacy regulations (GDPR (gdp, 2018), CCPA (ccp, 2024), PIPL (pip, 2024)), the committee semantically delimits the Dn​e​cD_{nec} boundary (Data minimization principle), ensuring only data falling outside both Di​n​tD_{int} and Dn​e​cD_{nec} is flagged as DO​ED_{OE}.
Figure 3. Workflow of AgentRaft.
3.1. Overall Design
AgentRaft is a novel framework designed to identify fine-grained data over-exposure risks in LLM Agent systems. Its core is to treat the Agent’s tool ecosystem as a structured execution space, where potential leakage paths are identified via dependency modeling and activated through intent-driven prompt synthesis. As shown in Figure 3, AgentRaft comprises three synergistic modules: Cross-Tool Function Call Graph Generation, User Prompt Synthesis, and Data Over-Exposure Detection.
Cross-Tool Function Call Graph Generation.
To uncover the latent privacy risks concealed within complex, multi-stage tool orchestrations, this module performs data dependency construction of the Agent’s tool execution logic to build a Cross-Tool Function Call Graph (FCG). Rather than blindly navigating the exponential combinatorial space of potential tool permutations, AgentRaft performs Function Pair Dependency Modeling and Call Edge Generation & Combination to transform the chaotic tool interaction landscape into a structured, traversable call graph. This process effectively prunes semantically invalid call chains and isolates only valid data-flow channels, providing a formal roadmap that captures how sensitive information propagates through multi-hop call chains for subsequent privacy auditing.
User Prompt Synthesis.  This module transforms abstract call chains into executable test cases to evaluate the Agent’s privacy behavior. The primary objective is to generate high-valid user prompts that deterministically trigger specific cross-tool call chains for data-flow inspection. To achieve this, AgentRaft extracts reachable paths (from source to sink) from the FCG and converts them into structured prompt templates. These templates are then instantiated with concrete user assets (the actual information of the user), which are partitioned into User Intent Data (Di​n​tD_{int}) and Over-exposure Candidates. By strictly constraining the resulting prompt to Di​n​tD_{int}, AgentRaft establishes a clear intent boundary in user prompt (representing user intent).
Data Over-Exposure Detection.
To quantitatively determine privacy violations, this module monitors the Agent’s runtime execution by executing the synthesized user prompt provided by previous module. AgentRaft reproduces the target data flow and captures the fine-grained runtime data trace, including all intermediate data processed by the LLM. We then apply the formal over-exposure paradigm: a violation is identified if the data transmitted to the sink contains candidates beyond the scope of functional necessity (Dn​e​cD_{nec}) and explicit user intent (Di​n​tD_{int}). This module effectively distinguishes between legitimate tool-servicing data and unintended sensitive exposure, providing an automated verdict on the system’s privacy integrity. Finally, the AgentRaft output all the call chains that affected by DOE risk.
4. Core Design of AgentRaft
4.1. Cross-Tool Function Call Graph Generation
The primary objective of this module is to construct the data-flow landscape of the Agent system by identifying inter-tool and intra-tool function dependencies. By formalizing these relationships into a Cross-Tool Function Call Graph (FCG), AgentRaft provides a structural blueprint that supports subsequent targeted and in-depth data flow analysis. Figure 4 illustrate the whole process of this module, which combined Function Pair Dependency Modeling and Call Edge Generatin.
Formal Definitions of FCG.
To provide a rigorous basis for graph construction, we define the following core components:
•
Cross-Tool Function Call Graph: Formally, G=(N,E)G=(N,E) is a directed graph representing the potential interaction landscape of an Agent’s toolset. Unlike traditional call graph in software engineering that describe fixed, hard-coded execution paths, the Agent FCG serves as an over-approximation of all semantically valid tool combinations. While individual tools act as atomic operators for specific sub-tasks, the transitions between them are dynamically orchestrated by the LLM’s reasoning. Thus, our FCG formalizes the space of all possible logical associations that the LLM might navigate during runtime.
•
Entry Node: A virtual node representing the user’s initial input point, which serves as the trigger for the entire execution sequence.
•
Function Node: Each function node n∈Nn\in N represents an individual function within the Agent’s toolset (e.g., read_email).
•
Call Edge: An edge e⁡(ni,nj)e(n_{i},n_{j}) represents an abstract action instruction that guides the LLM to invoke function njn_{j} with the output of nin_{i}. For example, a chain from Entry →\rightarrow read_email →\rightarrow send_email is connected by edges representing the logic of “reading content of the email” and “transmitting that content via email.”
Figure 4. The process of Cross-Tool Function Call Graph generation.
4.1.1. Function Pair Dependency Modeling
To accurately identify true data dependencies between tool functions while managing computational overhead, AgentRaft employs a hybrid strategy of Static Function Analysis and LLM-based Validation. While a naive LLM-only approach could theoretically determine associations, it suffers from prohibitive token costs and latency when dealing with extensive toolsets.
Stage 1: Compatible Pairs Extraction. We first perform rapid static analysis on function signatures to obtain all compatible function pairs of the whole tool function set, and eliminate the incompatible function pairs that never transmit data.. Specifically, AgentRaft checks whether the return type of one function and the input type of another satisfy the following relationships (as shown in Table 9). (1) Type equivalence: The input type of one function matches the return type of another; (2) Type subset: The input/return type of one function is a subset of the return/input type of another; (3) Type conversion: The return type of one function can be converted to the input type of another. If the function pair follow the above rules, AgentRaft flag them as compatible. For custom objects and containers, AgentRaft recursively scans nested member variables to ensure no potential data-flow link is overlooked.
Stage 2: Dependency Validation. Since static analysis only infers “type-level” possibility, it may produce false positives where the semantics are logically disjoint (e.g., read_email and read_file in Figure 4). Equipped with strong natural language understanding, the AgentRaft leverages LLM to judge whether the output of a preceding function is logically relevant to serve as the input of a subsequent function, based on functional descriptions and parameter names (e.g., “extract email body”, “send text message”). This step precisely filters false-positive dependencies generated by static analysis, ensuring the accuracy of final dependency relationships. Ultimately, AgentRaft outputs all function pairs with data dependencies.
4.1.2. Call Edge Generation & Combination
Once valid function pairs are identified, AgentRaft generates an action prompt that connects the function pairs into a Call Edge (drive the Agent to invoke function pairs). To avoid semantic drift and ensure consistent path activation, we adopt a “Semantic Extraction + Structured Template” strategy.
First, AgentRaft extracts the core Verb (action) and Object (target) from each function’s natural language description. Then, AgentRaft fill these entities into a deterministic template to generate an abstract action instruction (i.e., Call edge). Call Edge Template: “Based on the {object1} {verb1} by the previous step, the next step is to {verb2} {object2} based on the {object1}.”
For instance, for the read_email →\rightarrow send_email pair, the call edge is “Based on the [email content] [read] by the previous step, the next step is to [send] [the email] based on that [content].” This structured generation ensures that the resulting user prompts are precise enough to drive the Agent through the intended data-flow path without ambiguity. At last, by integrating all validated function pairs and their corresponding call edges, AgentRaft produces a comprehensive Function Call Graph, which serves as the foundation for the subsequent prompt generation and data over-exposure detection.
4.2. User Prompt Synthesis
To effectively detect data over-exposure, AgentRaft must ensure that the Agent not only has the capability to interact with tools but is also deterministically driven to traverse specific “source-to-sink” paths. This module transforms the static topological paths of the Function Call Graph (FCG) into executable, high-fidelity user prompts. The synthesis process follows a two-stage pipeline: Call Chain Retrieval and Call Chain User Prompt Instantiation, ensuring that the resulting user prompts are both semantically coherent and focused on fine-grained data fields.
Figure 5. The process of User Prompt Synthesis.
4.2.1. Call Chain Retrieval
The primary goal of this stage is to exhaustively extract all reachable execution call chain from a designated source node to a sink node, and further generate the prompt template of the call chain. Given the FCG constructed in previous module, we employ a Breadth-First Search (BFS) algorithm to traverse the graph and identify all acyclic paths.
As detailed in Algorithm 3, the retrieval process validates the existence of the source-sink pair and maintains a queue of explored functional chains. To ensure testing efficiency and prevent infinite loops, we explicitly prune cyclic trajectories. After that, AgentRaft obtains a set of call chains from source to sink, each chain representing a potential data-flow channel that requires privacy validation.
Furthermore, as a call chain is essentially constituted by a sequence of validated call edges, AgentRaft synthesizes a dedicated call chain prompt template by concatenating the individual instructions of these constituent edges (Figure 5). By merging the standardized semantic templates of each edge from the call chain (Section 4.1.2), AgentRaft constructs a logically coherent workflow instruction template. This resulting Call Chain Prompt Template serves as the foundational structure for subsequent user prompt instantiation. It ensures that the final trigger accurately encapsulates the multi-step execution logic required to drive the Agent through the entire data-flow call chain from source to sink.
4.2.2. User Prompt Instantiation along the Call Chain
While a retrieved call chain prompt template provides a structural workflow description, it remains an abstract template “skeleton.” This stage involves transforming the prompt template into a concrete natural language user prompt that an Agent can execute.
As shown in Figure 5, AgentRaft starts by performing fine-grained labeling on the user’s accessible assets, such as local files or contact lists. Within these assets, a subset of data fields is designated as user intent data (Di​n​tD_{int}), representing the specific information the user “officially” requests to transmit (i.e., Payment date, Amount). While the remaining data is labeled as over-exposure candidates, such as credit card and cvv/cvc. This partitioning creates a controlled testing environment where any transmission of the candidates constitutes a potential violation risk. To ensure the Agent successfully invokes the call chain, AgentRaft then performs entity instantiation by leveraging an LLM to resolve abstract placeholders within the template into concrete entities. By processing the call chain, function metadata, and the labeled Di​n​tD_{int}, generic terms like “[path]” are replaced with specific identifiers such as “./trans.history,” and the user prompt is strictly constrained to the processing of fine-grained data Di​n​tD_{int}, such as extracting only the payment date and amount.
By focusing the user prompt exclusively on the transmission of Di​n​tD_{int}, AgentRaft creates a rigorous intent boundary. If the Agent subsequently transmits data from the over-exposure candidates during the user prompt execution, it provides undeniable evidence of potential data over-exposure.
4.3. Data Over-Exposure Detection
The final module of AgentRaft performs a quantitative assessment of privacy integrity by monitoring the Agent’s runtime behavior and verifying data boundaries. As illustrated in Figure 3(c), this module is designed to detect whether unauthorized sensitive data leaks through the function call chain via the data flow tracking mechanism and automated judging pipeline. At last, the AgentRaft output all the call chains that affected by DOE risk.
4.3.1. Taint Data Tracking
In this phase, AgentRaft executes the synthesized prompts within a controlled Agent Runtime Environment to reproduce the execution path. The core of our tracking lies in the fine-grained labeling of data retrieved at the source function. Specifically, once the source function returns the full dataset DtotalD_{\text{total}}, AgentRaft identifies data elements that fall beyond the specified user intent (DintD_{\text{int}}) and assigns them a Taint Label (marked as target in our trace).
To provide a deterministic view of data propagation, AgentRaft captures payloads at three critical observation points through the Agent Trace (i.e., Agent execution log): (i) the Source_function, to ensure tainted data and DintD_{\text{int}} are correctly isolated; (ii) the Tool_function, to track intermediate processing; and (iii) the Sink_function, to intercept the final packet delivered to external parties. This process monitors whether tainted candidates persist throughout the functional chain. For more details, the whole LLM Agent taint propagation algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
4.3.2. Over-Exposure Judging
To determine whether the transmitted data DtransD_{\text{trans}} constitutes a violation, AgentRaft implements a multi-LLM voting consensus grounded in standard privacy regulation (GDPR (gdp, 2018), CCPA (ccp, 2024), and PIPL (pip, 2024)). According to our problem formulation, data is considered over-exposed if it falls outside the union of user-intended data (DintD_{\text{int}}) and functionally necessary data (DnecD_{\text{nec}}).
While DintD_{\text{int}} is explicitly defined in the prompt synthesis, identifying DnecD_{\text{nec}} requires a nuanced understanding of the Data Minimization and Least Privilege principles. To achieve this, AgentRaft provides the intercepted data transmitted to sink, the user’s intent, and the sink function’s metadata to a committee of multiple LLMs. These models are prompted with security specifications derived from three global privacy regulations (GDPR, CCPA, PIPL) to judge whether each data field is strictly essential for the sink’s functionality. The final verdict on DnecD_{\text{nec}} is reached through a majority vote among the LLMs, which significantly mitigates individual model bias and enhances detection accuracy. If the final DtransD_{\text{trans}} contains elements that are neither in DintD_{\text{int}} nor DnecD_{\text{nec}}, AgentRaft flags a Data Over-exposure result. The prompt of the committee of multiple LLMs to judge DOE is shown in Section Appendix A.3 due to the space limitation.
5. Evaluation
5.1. Evaluation Setup
Dataset.
To systematically evaluate Data Over-exposure (DOE) risks in the current LLM Agent ecosystem, we construct a testing environment based on real-world tools. More specifically, we crawled 6,675 tools from MCP.so (mcp, 2026), one of the largest markets for the Agent tool. Our analysis (Table 10) revealed that the ecosystem is dominated by four primary scenarios: Data Management & Analysis (58.5%), Software Dev & IT Ops (56.6%), Enterprise Collaboration (39.8%), and Social Platform Communication (21.7%). The detailed distribution of agent tools across different scenarios is shown in Table 10, Appendix.
Table 1. Characteristics of major LLM Agent app scenarios including func, source, and sink.
Scenario of Agent
Introduction
Toolset
# Func
# Source 11
1
we manually label the source and sink functions of toolset for each Agent. The source refers to the functions that return/obatin the user information, the sink refers to the functions that send the data to third-parties. The whole source and sink functions are shown in Table 11, Appendix.
# Sink 11
1
we manually label the source and sink functions of toolset for each Agent. The source refers to the functions that return/obatin the user information, the sink refers to the functions that send the data to third-parties. The whole source and sink functions are shown in Table 11, Appendix.
Enterprise Collaboration (Enterprise)
General office agent scenarios for organizational collaboration.
WhatsApp, ClaudePost, Notes, Chrome
23
14
6
Software Dev & IT Ops (DevOps)
Professional agent scenarios for technical R&D.
GitHub, DesktopCommander, Filesystem, MySQL
36
27
5
Social Platform Comm. (Social)
Social agent scenarios for individuals or small teams.
Chrome, RedNote, WhatsApp, Discord
34
13
6
Data Management & Analysis (Data)
Intelligent agent scenarios for data-driven tasks.
Filesystem, MySQL, Excel, QuickData
28
6
7
Total
-
-
121
60
24
Given the distribution of real-world tools, our evaluation is centered on four representative Agents crafted by our own, as shown in Table 1, each Agent is designed to correspond to one of these major scenarios while encompassing the general functionalities inherent to those domains. Note that we cannot directly evaluate proprietary commercial agents22
2
While developers can independently deploy AgentRaft for internal privacy vetting of their own proprietary tools, auditing the ad-hoc agent/tool usage of individual end-users remains outside the scope of this work. because the inaccessibility of their internal execution environments precludes the collection of fine-grained runtime traces, which are essential for data flow inspection.
To this end, we selected the top-four scenarios as our primary evaluation targets, because they represent the vast majority of the ecosystem. For each scenario, we utilized an LLM to assist in curating a comprehensive toolset for the respective Agent, ensuring it covers the most common functional requirements of that domain.
Environment Setting.  We choose to implement our framework on AgentDojo (Debenedetti et al., 2024) primarily because its extensible open-source architecture allows for full customization of core agent components while delivering the comprehensive runtime traceability. Furthermore, this architecture makes our implementation easily reproducible and scalable, providing a standardized platform for future research to follow and optimize. We implemented real-world tool functionalities crawled from MCP.so into the AgentDojo ecosystem.
For internal modules, we adopted a modular model strategy: DeepSeek-V3.2 (dee, 2025) for Cross-Tool Function Call Graph Generation, Qwen3-Plus (qwe, 2025) for User Prompt Synthesis, and a voting committee (GPT-4.1 (gpt, 2025a), Qwen3-Plus (qwe, 2025), DeepSeek-V3.2 (dee, 2025)) for DOE detection. The details of model selection is in Section 5.3. The tested agents are consistently powered by GPT-5.1 (gpt, 2025b). Note that the choice of specific LLM only represents different Agent implementation configurations and has nothing to do with the detection mechanism or effectiveness of AgentRaft.
Regarding user assets, we leverage DeepSeek-V3.2 to automatically generate specific resources based on the environment schema and tools of each Agent. These assets are strategically populated with a controlled mixture of simulated Personally Identifiable Information (PII) and business data to provide a rigorous foundation for evaluating data over-exposure risks across the selected scenarios.
Research Questions.
We evaluate AgentRaft by answering the following four research questions:
•
RQ1: Overall Effectiveness. How effectively can AgentRaft identify Data Over-Exposure (DOE) risks across diverse LLM Agent app scenarios?
•
RQ2: Effectiveness of Individual Components. What are the specific contributions and performance of AgentRaft’s core modules, including call graph construction, user prompt generation, DOE identification (over-exposure judge)?
•
RQ3: Comparison with Baseline Approach. How does AgentRaft perform compared to the baseline methods in DOE detection?
•
RQ4: Performance Overhead. What are the computational and temporal costs associated with deploying AgentRaft for automated auditing?
Table 2. Overall result of DOE prevalence across different levels: call chain, user prompt, and exposed data.
Scenario
Call Chain (Source →\rightarrow Sink)
Generated User Prompt
Data Fields
Total
Involving DOE
Total
Involving DOE
Involving DOE
Enterprise
154
94 / 154 (61.04%)
770
321 / 770 (41.69%)
539 / 841 (64.09%)
DevOps
233
145 / 233 (62.23%)
1,160
449 / 1,160 (38.71%)
655 / 993 (65.93%)
Social
89
56 / 89 (62.91%)
445
196 / 445 (44.04%)
224 / 354 (63.28%)
Data
132
52 / 132 (39.39%)
660
192 / 660 (29.09%)
385 / 568 (67.78%)
Total
608
347 / 608 (57.07%)
3,035
1,158 / 3,035 (38.15%)
1,803 / 2,756 (65.42%)
Note: Each call chain is tested with five user prompts for robustness (154 chains ×\times 5 = 770 user prompts). “Involving DOE” counts instances at both chain, prompt, and data field levels. The ratio X/YX/Y in Data Fields reflects over-exposed fields (XX) relative to the total fields transmitted (YY) within user prompts involving DOE (e.g. 321 instances in Enterprise scenario).
5.2. RQ1: Overall Effectiveness
The overall result of DOE is shown in Table 2, we quantify the results at three different level: call chains, user prompts, and exposed data fields.
DOE Discovery at Call Chain.
Our framework extracts a total of 608 potential call chains across the four scenarios through FCG generation and traverse all path from source to sink. AgentRaft successfully identifies that 347 chains (57.07%) involve DOE risks, where sensitive data from sources reached sinks without functional necessity and misalign with user intent. Specifically, the Software Dev & IT Ops scenario exhibits the highest number of vulnerable paths (145 chains), while the Data Management & Analysis scenario shows a significant risk surface with 52 identified DOE chains. These results indicate that DOE is a systemic risk prevalent in diverse Agent applications.
DOE Risks at User Prompt Level.
To verify the DOE risks in the analyzed Agents, AgentRaft synthesizes a total of 3,035 user prompts, the framework creates 5 prompts for each identified call chain to ensure auditing robustness. Among these, 1,158 prompts (38.2%) have at least one DOE instance. This also highlights the pervasive nature of DOE risks across various agent tasks. Beyond simply triggering leaks, the effectiveness of prompt synthesis is further evidenced by its high execution validity. More specifically, the majority of generated high-valid prompts successfully steer the Agent to follow the targeted tool call chain from the FCG, a detailed evaluation of the validity of generated user prompt is presented in Section 5.3.
Exposure of Specific Data Fields.
We analyze the specific data fields transmitted during the 1,158 DOE-triggering prompts. Out of 2,756 total data fields transmitted to sinks, 1,803 fields (65.42%) are identified as over-exposed. This high leakage ratio, ranging from 63.28% in Social Platforms to 67.78% in Data Management, highlights the severity of the risk. Agents frequently transmit sensitive PII or business data that is irrelevant to the user’s specific request, confirming that current Agent designs lack sufficient data minimization principles. We present two real-world DOE cases in Section Appendix A.3 for more details.
Takeaway for RQ1.
The widespread discovery of DOE instances across all tested domains suggests that such risks are highly likely to exist in real-world LLM Agents, posing significant privacy and security risks.
5.3. RQ2: Effectiveness of Individual Components
Table 3. Evaluation of Function Call Graph Construction.
Scenario
Call Graph Size
TP
FP
FN
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1 (%)
Nodes
Edges
Enterprise
22
74
70
1
3
98.59
95.89
97.22
DevOps
36
117
101
6
10
94.39
90.99
92.66
Social
21
68
62
2
4
96.88
93.94
95.38
Data
28
73
68
2
3
97.14
95.77
96.45
Total
107
332
301
11
20
96.47
93.77
95.10
Note: Metrics are evaluated at the granularity of functional edges. TP: Correctly identified edges; FP: Over-reported edges; FN: Missed edges. TN is omitted as it represents the vast majority of non-existent edges in sparse call graphs and does not meaningfully reflect detection precision.
Robustness of Constructed FCG.  To demonstrate the robustness of the structural foundation Cross-Tool Function Call Graph (FCG) of AgentRaft, we evaluated the accuracy of the FCG generator across four scenarios (107 nodes and 332 edges). The results is shown in Table 3, demonstrate that AgentRaft achieves high-fidelity mapping of tool interactions, with an overall Precision of 96.47%, a Recall of 93.77%, and a robust F1-score of 95.10%. The consistently high recall across all scenarios indicates that the generated call chains can sufficiently cover the vast majority of valid tool interaction paths, effectively narrowing the search space for subsequent targeted user prompt generation while minimizing the risk of missing deep-seated DOE instances.
Despite the high accuracy, our analysis identifies 11 False Positives (FPs) and 20 False Negatives (FNs) that highlight the inherent challenges of semantic-based static auditing. FPs are primarily attributed to semantic overlap in tool documentation, where highly similar natural language descriptions (e.g., redundant logging or data retrieval utilities) lead the generator to infer non-existent data-flow dependencies. Conversely, FNs typically stem from implicit dependencies or non-standard data formats that are not explicitly defined in the natural language API signatures, resulting in missing logical edges. Nevertheless, the overall error rate remains low, confirming that the FCG serves as a reliable and comprehensive blueprint for driving the subsequent prompt synthesis.
Quality of Synthesized User Prompt.  To evaluate the fidelity of our dynamic auditing, we measure the ability of synthesized user prompts to successfully induce the Agent to execute the targeted tool call chains. As summarized in Table 4, AgentRaft achieved an aggregate trigger coverage of 93.74%, successfully guiding the Agent through the intended execution paths for 2,845 out of 3,035 generated prompts. Specifically, the coverage remained consistently high across all scenarios, peaking at 98.64% in the Data Management domain. This high fidelity ensures that the majority of our synthetic test prompts are executable and capable of verifying the DOE risks.
Table 4. User prompt synthesis and triggering effectiveness.
Scenario
# Generated Prompts
# Valid Prompts
Trigger Coverage (%)
Enterprise
770
711
92.34
DevOps
1,160
1,065
91.81
Social
445
418
93.93
Data
660
651
98.64
Total
3,035
2,845
93.74
Note: Trigger Coverage represents the ratio of user prompts that successfully trigger the LLM Agent to execute tool call chains.
Despite the high coverage rate, approximately 6.26% of the prompts failed to trigger the expected call chains due to a “semantic gap” between the audit intent and the Agent’s runtime reasoning. Our failure analysis identifies two primary causes: (1) LLM Reasoning Deviations: The decision-making LLM may occasionally misunderstand the user’s intent or fail to map complex natural language instructions to specific tool parameters, leading to “instruction drift” (Young et al., 2025) where the Agent invokes an alternative, non-targeted tool. (2) Path Constraints and State Dependencies: Certain deep call chains require specific intermediate data states or environmental IDs that, if not perfectly aligned with the LLM’s common-sense reasoning, may cause the Agent to terminate the execution prematurely or deviate to a more logical but unintended call chain. Nevertheless, the current coverage levels are sufficient to support systematic and large-scale privacy auditing of LLM Agents.
DOE Identification.  To evaluate the precision of our automated auditing, we assess the Over-Exposure Judge (Section 4.3.2) module at data-item granularity by sampling 100 random user prompts involving DOE for each scenario. As summarized in Table 5, AgentRaft achieves an aggregate Precision of 97.48%, a Recall of 98.25%, and an F1-score of 97.86%. The metrics remain consistently high across all evaluated domains, ranging from 97.28% to 98.26% F1-score, demonstrating that our framework can successfully distinguish between functionally necessary data (DnecD_{\text{nec}}) and over-exposed fields with minimal false alarms.
Table 5. Evaluation of DOE judge at data field granularity. We random sampled 100 user prompts involving DOE per scenario, and evaluate the data transmitted during the
execution.
Scenario
TP
FP
FN
TN
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1 (%)
Enterprise
165
4
3
91
97.63
98.21
97.92
DevOps
143
5
3
70
96.62
97.95
97.28
Social
112
3
2
64
97.39
98.25
97.82
Data
198
4
3
91
98.02
98.51
98.26
Total
618
16
11
316
97.48
98.25
97.86
TP: Redundant fields correctly identified as DOE;
FP: Necessary fields incorrectly flagged as DOE;
TN: Essential fields correctly recognized as necessary;
FN: Redundant fields missed by the judge.
The ground truth is established through manual cross-verification of the 100 sampled prompts.
A comparative analysis (Table 6) shows that our multi-LLM voting committee substantially outperforms individual models. Single-model baselines (GPT-4.1, DeepSeek-V3.2, Qwen3-Plus) achieve F1-scores of 83.71–84.15%, whereas our consensus mechanism reaches 97.92%, a roughly 14% improvement. False positives drop from up to 42 to 4, demonstrating the committee’s ability to reduce individual model bias and hallucinations. Remaining FPs and FNs (16 and 11) mainly arise from nuanced semantic edge cases where “functional necessity” remains inherently ambiguous under privacy regulations.
Table 6. Comparison of DOE judge accuracy between single LLMs and our Multi-LLM Voting (Enterprise scenario, user prompt involving DOE = 100).
Method
TP
FP
FN
TN
Precision (%)
Recall (%)
F1 (%)
Single-LLM (GPT-4.1)
146
32
23
62
82.02
86.39
84.15
Single-LLM (DeepSeek-V3.2)
149
38
20
56
79.68
88.17
83.71
Single-LLM (Qwen3-Plus)
152
42
17
52
78.35
89.94
83.75
Ours (Multi-LLM Voting)
165
4
3
91
97.63
98.21
97.92
Impact of LLM Models.  To justify our modular model selection strategy, we evaluate the performance of various LLM backbones across the two module (FCG Generation and User Prompt Synthesis) of AgentRaft. As summarized in Table 7, candidate models exhibit distinct advantages based on the specific cognitive requirements of each task. For FCG Construction, which requires precise logical mapping of tool dependencies, DeepSeek-V3.2 achieves a peak F1 score of 97.22% and identifies all 94 vulnerable call chains. Conversely, Qwen3-Plus demonstrates superior efficacy in User Prompt Synthesis, attaining a trigger coverage of 92.34% and generating 321 valid prompts that successfully trigger DOE.
Table 7. Effectiveness of each individual module in different LLM models (Enterprise scenario).
LLM
Call Graph Construction
User Prompt Synthesis
F1 (%)
# Call Chains
involving DOE
Coverage (%)
# User Prompts
involving DOE
GPT-4.1
85.40
82
87.20
290
Qwen3-Plus‡
88.10
86
92.34
321
DeepSeek-V3.2†
97.22
94
79.50
245
Note: †Selected for Call Graph Construction; ‡Selected for User Prompt Generation. Bold values represent the peak performance that justifies our modular model selection strategy.
This performance divergence further underscores the structural necessity of both the FCG and User Prompt Synthesis modules within the AgentRaft framework. Since DOE detection operates as a sequential pipeline, the final auditing effectiveness is strictly bounded by the fidelity of the FCG and the coverage of the user prompt execution. Specifically, low FCG accuracy would lead to an incomplete identification of potential attack paths, causing the system to overlook deep-seated risks (False Negatives). Similarly, insufficient prompt coverage would fail to activate and verify even the correctly identified risks during runtime. Therefore, the modular employment of specialized models is essential to ensure that neither stage becomes a bottleneck, thereby maximizing the end-to-end detection rate of complex privacy risks in LLM Agents.
Takeaway for RQ2.
The evaluation demonstrates that each constituent module of AgentRaft achieves high-fidelity performance across all metrics, collectively establishing a robust and effective pipeline for systematic Data Over-exposure detection.
Figure 6. DOE detection under different method (User prompt generation and over-exposure judge).
Note: This evaluation focuses on the Enterprise Collaboration scenario, contains 94 ground-truth call chains involving DOE.
5.4. RQ3: Comparison with Baseline Approach
Baseline Setting.  To isolate the contribution of each core component, we define three baseline configurations and evaluate them against AgentRaft within the Enterprise Collaboration scenario, which contains 94 ground-truth DOE risks (call chain level). We select one scenario for the cost consideration instead of all four scenarios and also because our framework is fundamentally scenario-agnostic. The baselines are structured as: (1) Baseline 1 (Random prompt generation by LLM + Single-LLM judge); (2) Baseline 2 (Random prompt generation by LLM + Multi-LLM voting judge); and (3) Baseline 3 (CG-guided prompt synthesis + Single-LLM judge). We choose GPT-4.1 for the single-LLM judge. The comparison result is shown in Figure 6.
User Prompt Generation.  The results highlight the critical role of the Function Call Graph (FCG) in navigating the Agent’s tool-use logic. Without the structural guidance of FCG, Baseline 1 and 2 fail to activate deep-seated logical call chains, capturing only approximately 18–20% of risks even after 300 prompts. In contrast, AgentRaft demonstrates superior discovery efficiency, capturing 69.15% of ground-truth DOE instances within the first 50 prompts. This underscores that FCG-guided synthesis effectively optimizes the search space, allowing for the rapid generation of high-quality test user prompts that target complex multi-tool sequences.
Over-Exposure Judge.  The necessity of the consensus-based identification is evidenced by the gap between AgentRaft and Baseline 3. While Baseline 3 benefits from CG-guided synthesis, its discovery rate plateaus at approximately 76.6% due to the inherent reasoning errors and hallucinations of a single-model judge. AgentRaft overcomes this bottleneck through the multi-LLM voting committee, achieving near-total coverage (∼\sim99%) at 150 prompts. These findings confirm that while FCG is essential for call chain activation, the voting mechanism is crucial for reducing identification noise and ensuring high-precision DOE risk verification in diverse Agent environments.
Takeaway for RQ3.
The comparative analysis demonstrates that the synergy between FCG-guided call chain activation and multi-LLM consensus is essential for achieving high detection coverage, as it significantly outperforms random search and single-model baselines in discovering deep-seated DOE risks.
Table 8. Overhead of AgentRaft, including resource rfficiency, execution Time, and coverage convergence (Scenario: Enterprise, Call chains involving DOE = 94).
Method
Coverage
(User Prompts = 150)
Execution Time (s)
Token Cost
Cost / Chain
Cost with
Full Coverage
Gen. Time
Det. Time
Baseline 1 (w/o CG, w/o Voting)
9.57% (9/94)
118.14
1,488.43
0.43M
0.048M
Infeasible∗
Baseline 2 (w/o CG, w/ Voting)
11.70% (11/94)
118.14
1,534.77
1.16M
0.105M
Infeasible∗
Baseline 3 (w/ CG, w/o Voting)
58.51% (55/94)
128.93
1,497.06
0.42M
0.008M
Total 8.2M
Ours (w/ CG, w/ Voting)
98.94% (93/94)
128.93
1,635.23
1.15M
0.012M
Total 1.2M
Note: Cost with Full Coverage shows the total token expenditure to identify all 94 DOE chains. ∗Infeasible indicates that the method fails to reach convergence within a reasonable budget (e.g., user prompts >5,000>5,000) due to the lack of logic guidance. Execution time is split into Gen. Time (prompt generation) and Det. Time (environment execution and DOE detection).
5.5. RQ4: Performance Overhead
We evaluate the resource efficiency of AgentRaft across temporal and economic dimensions. The comparative results are detailed in Table 8.
Temporal Efficiency.
AgentRaft demonstrates superior temporal efficiency by leveraging the FCG to prune execution call chains without risk and focus the audit on high-risk logical flows. In the Enterprise scenario featuring 94 DOE-related call chains, our framework generates 150 targeted prompts in 128.93 seconds and completes the detection phase in 1635.23 seconds, achieving a verification coverage of 98.94% (93/94 chains). While the multi-LLM voting mechanism introduces a marginal detection latency compared to the single-model Baseline 3 (1497.06s), this trade-off is justified by the near-total coverage attained within the same prompt budget. In contrast, non-FCG baselines (Baselines 1 and 2) remain trapped in search space explosions, failing to exceed 12% coverage within similar execution timeframes.
Resource and Cost-Effectiveness.
Economically, AgentRaft optimizes token expenditure by significantly reducing the volume of required test vectors through logical guidance. Auditing 150 prompts incurs a total token expenditure of 1.15M, resulting in a high-efficiency cost of only 0.012M tokens per verified DOE chain. This represents an 88.6% reduction in per-chain verification cost compared to Baseline 2 (0.105M tokens/chain), demonstrating that the “safety premium” of multi-model voting is effectively offset by the drastic reduction in required prompt volume. Most importantly, our approach achieves full auditing convergence with a projected cost of only 1.2M tokens, whereas the single-model Baseline 3 requires an estimated 8.2M tokens due to its lower identification accuracy and inherent false negatives. Traditional random-search methods (Baselines 1 and 2) are deemed computationally infeasible for full-scale auditing, as they fail to reach convergence within any reasonable resource budget.
Takeaway for RQ4.
The evaluation confirms that AgentRaft achieves rapid detection convergence with high cost-effectiveness, reducing per-chain verification costs by 88.6% and making systematic DOE auditing computationally feasible and scalable for real-world Agent deployments.
6. Discussion
Application Scenarios of AgentRaft.
While presented as a detection framework, AgentRaft’s Cross-Tool Function Call Graph (FCG), test case generation, and data flow analysis provide a deterministic foundation for broader security tasks in the agent ecosystem. heFCG maps an agent’s “safe operating space”, offering a structural blueprint beyond auditing. For instance, the FCG can be employed for runtime anomaly detection, where any deviation in the execution trace from the statically verified edges could signify prompt injection or logic hijacking. Furthermore, it enables pre-deployment policy enforcement, allowing developers to formally verify that no data transmission exists between sensitive sources and public sinks. In this light, AgentRaft not only uncovers privacy risks but provides the primitives to make LLM agents auditable and trustworthy.
Limitations.
While AgentRaft provides a systematic approach to detecting DOE risks, several limitations remain to be addressed. First, the overall effectiveness of our framework is intrinsically linked to the underlying LLM’s reasoning performance, occasional hallucinations or reasoning failures may inevitably affect the precision and recall of risk detection. Moreover, our FCG construction currently focuses on static and semi-dynamic dependency mapping. For the environments where tools are dynamically added or modified at runtime, the graph may require frequent re-validation to maintain an accurate representation of the interaction landscape.
Mitigation Strategies.
The persistence of DOE risks calls for a multi-layered defense. First, architectural refactoring should shift the “Broad Data Paradigm” toward atomic functionality by decomposing multi-field tools into single-purpose functions to reduce initial data over-supply. Furthermore, privacy-centric alignment can train LLMs to prioritize data minimization by explicitly recognizing and pruning fields unrelated to the user’s intent. Finally, runtime governance via a privacy-aware proxy can dynamically redact non-essential fields from data payloads before they reach external sinks, providing fine-grained control without compromising agent autonomy.
7. Related Work
Privacy Leakage in LLM-based Systems.
The integration of Large Language Models (LLMs) into autonomous agents has expanded the attack surface for privacy violations (Wang et al., 2025a; He et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2025c). Early research focused on model-centric risks, such as training data extraction (Cheng et al., 2025a; Zhao et al., 2025) and membership inference attacks (Hu et al., 2022; Shokri et al., 2017). As agents began utilizing external tools, research shifted toward execution-time vulnerabilities (Wu et al., 2024b; Zhang et al., 2025; Cheng et al., 2025b; Cui et al., 2025; Gan et al., 2024), including prompt injection (Zhang et al., 2025; Cheng et al., 2025b) and malicious plugin exploitation (Cui et al., 2025; Gan et al., 2024; Fang et al., 2024). However, most existing works focus on adversarial scenarios where an attacker intentionally triggers a leak. Our work diverges by focusing on architectural risks where legitimate tool-calling sequences inadvertently cause data over-exposure during normal operations.
Data Over-Exposure in Traditional Software.
Data Over-Exposure (DOE) is a well-recognized challenge in software engineering, particularly within Web APIs (Aliyeva and Egele, 2021; Valencia et al., 2024; Nie et al., 2025), mobile application backends (Koch et al., 2017; Rathore and Tripathy, 2020; Zuo et al., 2019), and IoT systems (Hui et al., 2020; Tyagi and Goyal, 2020; Wang et al., 2025b). In traditional systems, DOE occurs when a server returns a full database object to the client, even if only a subset of fields is required for the user interface. To mitigate this issue, prior work has proposed fine-grained data fetching mechanisms such as GraphQL (Bajqinca and Ismaili, 2025), as well as program analysis techniques (Tuan et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2013; Arzt et al., 2014; Enck et al., 2014) to detect over-sharing in REST APIs and privacy-sensitive applications.
Beyond API design, privacy compliance and automated auditing have also relied on static and dynamic analysis (Ferrara et al., 2018; Khedkar, 2023; M. Binder and Kunz, 2024; Lei et al., 2024), often leveraging formal methods and taint tracking (Klymenko et al., 2022; Antignac et al., 2018; Tuan et al., 2019; Yang et al., 2013; Arzt et al., 2014; Enck et al., 2014) to monitor sensitive data flows in Web and mobile environments. More recent efforts further incorporate natural language processing to bridge the gap between regulations like GDPR and CCPA and system behaviors (Mahendran et al., 2021; Adhikari et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2021).
8. Conclusion
This paper quantifies the systemic Data Over-Exposure (DOE) risks inherent in the autonomous execution of LLM agents. By proposing the AgentRaft framework, we demonstrate that a combination of structural call graph modeling, user prompt synthesis, and multi-model consensus auditing can effectively enforce deterministic privacy boundaries within non-deterministic agent workflows. Our extensive evaluation of 6,675 tools confirms that current agent designs frequently violate data minimization principles, exposing 65.42% of transmitted data fields as redundant or sensitive. AgentRaft not only achieves high precision with a 97.92% F1-score but also significantly optimizes auditing efficiency, achieving an 88.6% cost reduction compared to conventional methods.
References
gdp (2018)
2018.
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR). Art. 5
Principles relating to processing of personal data.
https://gdpr-info.eu/art-5-gdpr/.
ccp (2024)
2024.
CCPA: California Consumer Privacy Act.
https://oag.ca.gov/privacy/ccpa.
pip (2024)
2024.
Personal information protection law of the People’s
Republic of China (PIPL).
http://www.npc.gov.cn/npc/c30834/202108/a8c4e3672c74491a80b53a172bb753fe.shtml.
dee (2025)
2025.
DeepSeek-V3.2: Pushing the Frontier of Open Large
Language Models.
https://huggingface.co/deepseek-ai/DeepSeek-V3.2.
gpt (2025a)
2025a.
GPT-4.1 Model — OpenAI API Documentation.
https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-4.1.
gpt (2025b)
2025b.
GPT-5.1 Model — OpenAI API Documentation.
https://platform.openai.com/docs/models/gpt-5.1.
qwe (2025)
2025.
Qwen-Plus: Advanced Large Language Model for
Reasoning, Dialogue, and Content Generation.
https://www.aliyun.com/benefit/scene/qwen-plus.
mcp (2026)
2026.
Find Awesome MCP Servers and Clients.
https://mcp.so/.
ema (2026)
2026.
Front: End the shared inbox chaos once and for all.
https://front.com/lp2/email-management.
ove (2026a)
2026a.
Pokee AI: Intelligent, Intuitive Assistance with all
your Tasks.
https://pokee.ai/.
fil (2026)
2026.
A Powerful File System Tool (for llm function
calling).
https://github.com/teamdatatonic/file-system-agent.
ove (2026b)
2026b.
Shortwave: Automate your email with AI.
https://www.shortwave.com/.
Adhikari et al. (2025)
Andrick Adhikari, Sanchari
Das, and Rinku Dewri. 2025.
Natural Language Processing of Privacy Policies: A
Survey.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.10319
(2025).
Aliyeva and Egele (2021)
Assel Aliyeva and Manuel
Egele. 2021.
Oversharing is not caring: How cname cloaking can
expose your session cookies. In Proceedings of the
2021 ACM Asia Conference on Computer and Communications Security.
123–134.
Antignac et al. (2018)
Thibaud Antignac, Riccardo
Scandariato, and Gerardo Schneider.
2018.
Privacy compliance via model transformations. In
2018 IEEE European Symposium on Security and
Privacy Workshops (EuroS&PW). IEEE, 120–126.
Arzt et al. (2014)
Steven Arzt, Siegfried
Rasthofer, Christian Fritz, Eric Bodden,
Alexandre Bartel, Jacques Klein,
Yves Le Traon, Damien Octeau, and
Patrick McDaniel. 2014.
Flowdroid: Precise context, flow, field,
object-sensitive and lifecycle-aware taint analysis for android apps.
ACM sigplan notices 49,
6 (2014), 259–269.
Bajqinca and Ismaili (2025)
Artan Bajqinca and
Lavdim Ismaili. 2025.
Optimizing GraphQL Security: Enhancing Data
Protection and System Reliability.
(2025).
Cheng et al. (2025a)
Wen Cheng, Ke Sun,
Xinyu Zhang, and Wei Wang.
2025a.
Security attacks on llm-based code completion
tools. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 39.
23669–23677.
Cheng et al. (2025b)
Wen Cheng, Ke Sun,
Xinyu Zhang, and Wei Wang.
2025b.
Security attacks on llm-based code completion
tools. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, Vol. 39.
23669–23677.
Cui et al. (2025)
Yu Cui, Sicheng Pan,
Yifei Liu, Haibin Zhang, and
Cong Zuo. 2025.
Vortexpia: Indirect prompt injection attack against
llms for efficient extraction of user privacy.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.04261
(2025).
Debenedetti et al. (2024)
Edoardo Debenedetti, Jie
Zhang, Mislav Balunovic, Luca
Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fischer, and
Florian Tramèr. 2024.
Agentdojo: A dynamic environment to evaluate prompt
injection attacks and defenses for llm agents.
Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems 37 (2024),
82895–82920.
Enck et al. (2014)
William Enck, Peter
Gilbert, Seungyeop Han, Vasant
Tendulkar, Byung-Gon Chun, Landon P Cox,
Jaeyeon Jung, Patrick McDaniel, and
Anmol N Sheth. 2014.
Taintdroid: an information-flow tracking system for
realtime privacy monitoring on smartphones.
ACM Transactions on Computer Systems (TOCS)
32, 2 (2014),
1–29.
Fang et al. (2024)
Richard Fang, Rohan
Bindu, Akul Gupta, and Daniel Kang.
2024.
Llm agents can autonomously exploit one-day
vulnerabilities.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.08144
(2024).
Ferrara et al. (2018)
Pietro Ferrara, Fausto
Spoto, et al. 2018.
Static analysis for GDPR compliance. In
CEUR Workshop Proceedings,
Vol. 2058. CEUR Workshop Proceedings,
1–10.
Fung (2024)
Pascale Fung.
2024.
From Assistants to Agents in the LLM Era. In
Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International
Conference on Multimedia (MM ’24).
Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 1.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3664647.3676595
Gan et al. (2024)
Yuyou Gan, Yong Yang,
Zhe Ma, Ping He, Rui
Zeng, Yiming Wang, Qingming Li,
Chunyi Zhou, Songze Li,
Ting Wang, et al.
2024.
Navigating the risks: A survey of security,
privacy, and ethics threats in llm-based agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.09523
(2024).
He et al. (2025)
Feng He, Tianqing Zhu,
Dayong Ye, Bo Liu,
Wanlei Zhou, and Philip S Yu.
2025.
The emerged security and privacy of llm agent: A
survey with case studies.
Comput. Surveys 58,
6 (2025), 1–36.
Hu et al. (2022)
Hongsheng Hu, Zoran
Salcic, Lichao Sun, Gillian Dobbie,
Philip S Yu, and Xuyun Zhang.
2022.
Membership inference attacks on machine learning: A
survey.
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR)
54, 11s (2022),
1–37.
Hui et al. (2020)
Shuodi Hui, Zhenhua Wang,
Xueshi Hou, Xiao Wang,
Huandong Wang, Yong Li, and
Depeng Jin. 2020.
Systematically quantifying IoT privacy leakage in
mobile networks.
IEEE Internet of Things Journal
8, 9 (2020),
7115–7125.
Khedkar (2023)
Mugdha Khedkar.
2023.
Static analysis for android gdpr compliance
assurance. In 2023 IEEE/ACM 45th International
Conference on Software Engineering: Companion Proceedings (ICSE-Companion).
IEEE, 197–199.
Klymenko et al. (2022)
Oleksandra Klymenko,
Oleksandr Kosenkov, Stephen Meisenbacher,
Parisa Elahidoost, Daniel Mendez, and
Florian Matthes. 2022.
Understanding the implementation of technical
measures in the process of data privacy compliance: A qualitative study. In
Proceedings of the 16th ACM/IEEE International
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement.
261–271.
Koch et al. (2017)
William Koch, Abdelberi
Chaabane, Manuel Egele, William
Robertson, and Engin Kirda.
2017.
Semi-automated discovery of server-based
information oversharing vulnerabilities in android applications. In
Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGSOFT International
Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis. 147–157.
Lei et al. (2024)
Jingyi Lei, Yi Wu,
Nan Hu, Junjie Tao, Yin
Wang, Haijun Wang, and Ming Fan.
2024.
Dynamic Testing for Mobile Privacy Compliance. In
2024 IEEE 35th International Symposium on Software
Reliability Engineering Workshops (ISSREW). IEEE,
113–114.
Li et al. (2025)
Wenkai Li, Liwen Sun,
Zhenxiang Guan, Xuhui Zhou, and
Maarten Sap. 2025.
1-2-3 check: Enhancing contextual privacy in llm
via multi-agent reasoning. In Proceedings of the
The First Workshop on LLM Security (LLMSEC). 115–128.
M. Binder and Kunz (2024)
Andreas M. Binder and
Immanuel Kunz. 2024.
Using Static Code Analysis for GDPR Compliance
Checks. In European Symposium on Research in
Computer Security. Springer, 153–169.
Mahendran et al. (2021)
Darshini Mahendran,
Changqing Luo, and Bridget T Mcinnes.
2021.
Privacy-preservation in the context of natural
language processing.
IEEE access 9
(2021), 147600–147612.
Mireshghallah et al. (2023)
Niloofar Mireshghallah,
Hyunwoo Kim, Xuhui Zhou,
Yulia Tsvetkov, Maarten Sap,
Reza Shokri, and Yejin Choi.
2023.
Can llms keep a secret? testing privacy
implications of language models via contextual integrity theory.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.17884
(2023).
Nan et al. (2023)
Yuhong Nan, Xueqiang
Wang, Luyi Xing, Xiaojing Liao,
Ruoyu Wu, Jianliang Wu,
Yifan Zhang, and XiaoFeng Wang.
2023.
Are you spying on me?{\{Large-Scale}\} analysis
on {\{IoT}\} data exposure through companion apps. In
32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security
23). 6665–6682.
Nie et al. (2025)
Yu Nie, Jianming Fu,
Xinghang Lv, Chao Li,
Shixiong Yang, and Guojun Peng.
2025.
WAScope: Detecting privacy data leakage with web
application-specific API confusion.
Alexandria Engineering Journal
128 (2025), 1145–1158.
Rathore and Tripathy (2020)
Nemi Chandra Rathore and
Somanath Tripathy. 2020.
AppMonitor: restricting information leakage to
third-party applications.
Social Network Analysis and Mining
10, 1 (2020),
49.
Shokri et al. (2017)
Reza Shokri, Marco
Stronati, Congzheng Song, and Vitaly
Shmatikov. 2017.
Membership inference attacks against machine
learning models. In 2017 IEEE symposium on
security and privacy (SP). IEEE, 3–18.
Tuan et al. (2019)
Ly Hoang Tuan, Nguyen Tan
Cam, and Van-Hau Pham. 2019.
Enhancing the accuracy of static analysis for
detecting sensitive data leakage in Android by using dynamic analysis.
Cluster Computing 22,
Suppl 1 (2019),
1079–1085.
Tyagi and Goyal (2020)
Amit Kumar Tyagi and
Deepti Goyal. 2020.
A survey of privacy leakage and security
vulnerabilities in the internet of things. In 2020
5th International conference on communication and electronics systems
(ICCES). IEEE, 386–394.
Valencia et al. (2024)
René Edmundo Cuevas Valencia,
Arnulfo Catalán Villegas,
Angelino Feliciano Morales, and
Carlos Álvarez Carmona.
2024.
Monitoring Software Tool to Prevent Data Leaks in a
RESTful API. In International Conference on
Technologies and Innovation. Springer, 187–199.
Wang et al. (2025a)
Bo Wang, Weiyi He,
Shenglai Zeng, Zhen Xiang,
Yue Xing, Jiliang Tang, and
Pengfei He. 2025a.
Unveiling privacy risks in llm agent memory. In
Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the
Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers).
25241–25260.
Wang et al. (2024)
Luqiao Wang, Yangtao
Zhou, Huiying Zhuang, Qingshan Li,
Di Cui, Yutong Zhao, and
Lu Wang. 2024.
Unity Is Strength: Collaborative LLM-Based Agents
for Code Reviewer Recommendation. In Proceedings
of the 39th IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software
Engineering (ASE ’24).
Association for Computing Machinery,
New York, NY, USA, 2235–2239.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3691620.3695291
Wang et al. (2025c)
Shouju Wang, Fenglin Yu,
Xirui Liu, Xiaoting Qin,
Jue Zhang, Qingwei Lin,
Dongmei Zhang, and Saravan Rajmohan.
2025c.
Privacy in Action: Towards Realistic Privacy
Mitigation and Evaluation for LLM-Powered Agents.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.17488
(2025).
Wang et al. (2025b)
Zhaohui Wang, Bo Luo,
and Fengjun Li. 2025b.
PrivacyGuard: Exploring Hidden Cross-App Privacy
Leakage Threats In IoT Apps.
Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing
Technologies (2025).
Wu et al. (2024b)
Fangzhou Wu, Ning Zhang,
Somesh Jha, Patrick McDaniel, and
Chaowei Xiao. 2024b.
A new era in llm security: Exploring security
concerns in real-world llm-based systems.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.18649
(2024).
Wu et al. (2024a)
Jiangrong Wu, Yuhong Nan,
Luyi Xing, Jiatao Cheng,
Zimin Lin, Zibin Zheng, and
Min Yang. 2024a.
Leaking the Privacy of Groups and More:
Understanding Privacy Risks of Cross-App Content Sharing in Mobile
Ecosystem. NDSS.
Yang et al. (2021)
Lu Yang, Xingshu Chen,
Yonggang Luo, Xiao Lan, and
Li Chen. 2021.
PurExt: Automated Extraction of the Purpose-Aware
Rule from the Natural Language Privacy Policy in IoT.
Security and Communication Networks
2021, 1 (2021),
5552501.
Yang et al. (2013)
Zhemin Yang, Min Yang,
Yuan Zhang, Guofei Gu,
Peng Ning, and X Sean Wang.
2013.
Appintent: Analyzing sensitive data transmission in
android for privacy leakage detection. In
Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGSAC conference on
Computer & communications security. 1043–1054.
Young et al. (2025)
Richard J Young, Brandon
Gillins, and Alice M Matthews.
2025.
When Models Can’t Follow: Testing Instruction
Adherence Across 256 LLMs.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.18892
(2025).
Zhang et al. (2024)
Elisa Zhang, Shiyu Sun,
Yunlong Xing, and Kun Sun.
2024.
Poster: Repairing Bugs with the Introduction of New
Variables: A Multi-Agent Large Language Model. In
Proceedings of the 2024 on ACM SIGSAC Conference on
Computer and Communications Security (Salt Lake City, UT, USA)
(CCS ’24). Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA,
4961–4963.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3658644.3691412
Zhang et al. (2025)
Rupeng Zhang, Haowei
Wang, Junjie Wang, Mingyang Li,
Yuekai Huang, Dandan Wang, and
Qing Wang. 2025.
From allies to adversaries: Manipulating llm
tool-calling through adversarial injection. In
Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations
of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics:
Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers).
2009–2028.
Zhao et al. (2025)
Kaixiang Zhao, Lincan Li,
Kaize Ding, Neil Zhenqiang Gong,
Yue Zhao, and Yushun Dong.
2025.
A survey on model extraction attacks and defenses
for large language models. In Proceedings of the
31st ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining V. 2.
6227–6236.
Zuo et al. (2019)
Chaoshun Zuo, Zhiqiang
Lin, and Yinqian Zhang.
2019.
Why does your data leak? uncovering the data
leakage in cloud from mobile apps. In 2019 IEEE
Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). IEEE, 1296–1310.
Appendix Appendix A Details of AgentRaft
Appendix A.1. Compatible Func Pair Extraction
Table 9. Judgment rules for type dependencies between function return and input.
Relationship Type
Judgment Rule
Example
Type Equivalence
R​e​t​u​r​n​(T​y​p​eA)=I​n​p​u​t​(T​y​p​eB)Return(Type_{A})=Input(Type_{B})
R​e​t​u​r​n​(str)=I​n​p​u​t​(str)Return(\text{str})=Input(\text{str})
Type Subset
R​e​t​u​r​n​(T​y​p​eA)∈e​l​e​m​(I​n​p​u​t​(T​y​p​eB))Return(Type_{A})\in elem(Input(Type_{B}))
R​e​t​u​r​n​(str)∈e​l​e​m​(I​n​p​u​t​(List​[str]))Return(\text{str})\in elem(Input(\text{List}[\text{str}]))
I​n​p​u​t​(T​y​p​eB)∈e​l​e​m​(R​e​t​u​r​n​(T​y​p​eA))Input(Type_{B})\in elem(Return(Type_{A}))
I​n​p​u​t​(str)∈e​l​e​m​(R​e​t​u​r​n​(List​[str]))Input(\text{str})\in elem(Return(\text{List}[\text{str}]))
Type Conversion
R​e​t​u​r​n​(T​y​p​eA)→I​n​p​u​t​(T​y​p​eB)Return(Type_{A})\rightarrow Input(Type_{B})
R​e​t​u​r​n​(str(JSON))→I​n​p​u​t​(dict)Return(\text{str(JSON)})\rightarrow Input(\text{dict})
Table9 presents the judgment rules for type dependencies between function return values and inputs, including three core relationship types (type equivalence, type subset, and type conversion), along with corresponding judgment methods and specific examples to clarify the application scenarios of each rule.
Appendix A.2. Algorithm of AgentRaft
Taint Propagation Algorithm Notations. To formalize the LA-DTP algorithm, we define a set of core variables and symbols. We denote T​r​a​c​eTrace as the sequential log of tool invocations that captures function names, input arguments, and return values for each execution step. Dt​o​t​a​lD_{total} represents the complete, unfiltered dataset retrieved by a source function, while Di​n​tD_{int} is the fine-grained subset explicitly authorized by the user for transmission. The algorithm maintains a dynamic Taint Table 𝒯\mathcal{T} to track security labels (i.e., target or clean) for each data field throughout the execution. To capture semantic-level data flow, we introduce the semantic dependency function Φ⁡(a,f)\Phi(a,f), which determines whether a field aa is semantically derived from or associated with a previously observed field ff. Furthermore, Dn​e​cD_{nec} denotes the minimum required data fields necessary to fulfill the operational goals of a specific sink function. Finally, the over-exposure set DO​ED_{OE} is defined as the collection of sensitive data fields that are neither intended by the user (Di​n​tD_{int}) nor required for functional necessity (Dn​e​cD_{nec}).
Algorithm 1 is designed for dynamic tracking of the data flow in the execution process of LLM Agent. It implements accurate preprocess identification of Data Over-Exposure (DOE) by differentiating over-exposed candidates from user-intended data and functionally necessary data in the flow. The over-exposure candidates that identified by the algorithm will sent to Over-Exposure Judge module.
Algorithm 1  LLM Agent Dynamic Taint Propagation (LA-DTP)
1:
T​r​a​c​e,Dt​o​t​a​l,Di​n​t,R​e​g​sTrace,D_{total},D_{int},Regs
2:
DO​ED_{OE}
3:
function AnalyzeDataFlow(T​r​a​c​e,Dt​o​t​a​l,Di​n​t,R​e​g​sTrace,D_{total},D_{int},Regs)
4:
𝒯←Map​(field→label)\mathcal{T}\leftarrow\text{Map}(\text{field}\to\text{label})
5:
DO​E←∅D_{OE}\leftarrow\emptyset
6:
for each field f∈Dt​o​t​a​lf\in D_{total} do
7:
𝒯⁡[f]←(f∉Di​n​t)​?​target:clean\mathcal{T}[f]\leftarrow(f\notin D_{int})?\text{target}:\text{clean}
8:
end for
9:
for each step t∈T​r​a​c​et\in Trace do
10:
nt,A​r​g​st,R​e​st←ExtractStepDetails​(t)n_{t},Args_{t},Res_{t}\leftarrow\text{ExtractStepDetails}(t)
11:
for each field a∈A​r​g​sta\in Args_{t} do
12:
if ∃f∈History​(𝒯)​ s.t. ​Φ​(a,f)∧𝒯⁡[f]=target\exists f\in\text{History}(\mathcal{T})\text{ s.t. }\Phi(a,f)\land\mathcal{T}[f]=\text{target} then
13:
𝒯⁡[a]←target\mathcal{T}[a]\leftarrow\text{target}
14:
end if
15:
end for
16:
if isSink​(nt)\text{isSink}(n_{t}) then
17:
Dt​r​a​n​s←A​r​g​stD_{trans}\leftarrow Args_{t}
18:
Dn​e​c←ConsensusJudge​(Dt​r​a​n​s,nt,R​e​g​s)D_{nec}\leftarrow\text{ConsensusJudge}(D_{trans},n_{t},Regs)
19:
for each field a∈Dt​r​a​n​sa\in D_{trans} do
20:
if 𝒯⁡[a]=target∧a∉Dn​e​c\mathcal{T}[a]=\text{target}\land a\notin D_{nec} then
21:
DO​E←DO​E∪{a}D_{OE}\leftarrow D_{OE}\cup\{a\}
22:
end if
23:
end for
24:
end if
25:
𝒯.update​(R​e​st)\mathcal{T}.\text{update}(Res_{t})
26:
end for
27:
return DO​ED_{OE}
28:
end function
Algorithm 2  Call Graph Combination
1:
function CallGraphCombination(funcs, edges)
2:
CG ←\leftarrow {
3:
allNodes ←\leftarrow Empty Set,
4:
adjacencyList ←\leftarrow Empty Dict,
5:
entryNode ←\leftarrow "entry"
6:
}
7:
for f∈f​u​n​c​sf\in funcs do
8:
CG[allNodes].add(f)
9:
CG[adjacencyList][f] ←\leftarrow Empty List
10:
end for
11:
entryNode ←\leftarrow CG[entryNode]
12:
CG[allNodes].add(entryNode)
13:
CG[adjacencyList][entryNode] ←\leftarrow Empty List
14:
for e∈e​d​g​e​se\in edges do
15:
(s​r​c,t​g​t,a​c​t)←e(src,tgt,act)\leftarrow e
16:
if (s​r​c≠e​n​t​r​y​N​o​d​e​ and ​s​r​c∉C​G​[a​l​l​N​o​d​e​s])​ or ​(t​g​t∉C​G​[a​l​l​N​o​d​e​s])(src\neq entryNode\textbf{ and }src\notin CG[allNodes])\textbf{ or }(tgt\notin CG[allNodes]) then
17:
Continue
18:
end if
19:
CG[adjacencyList][src].append( (src, tgt, act) )
20:
end forreturn CG
21:
end function
Algorithm 3  Call Chain Retrieval from Call Graph
1:
function PathRetrievalBFS(callGraph, source, sink)
2:
validPaths ←\leftarrow Empty List
3:
if source ∉\notin callGraph[allNodes]  or  sink ∉\notin callGraph[allNodes] then
return validPaths
4:
end if
5:
queue ←\leftarrow Empty Queue
6:
Enqueue(queue, (source, [source]))
7:
while queue ≠\neq Empty do
8:
(currentNode, traversedPath) ←\leftarrow Dequeue(queue)
9:
nextNodes ←\leftarrow callGraph[adjacencyList][currentNode]
10:
for n​e​x​t​N​o​d​e∈n​e​x​t​N​o​d​e​snextNode\in nextNodes do
11:
if nextNode ∈\in traversedPath then
12:
Continue
13:
end if
14:
updatedPath ←\leftarrow traversedPath + [nextNode]
15:
if nextNode =⁣=== sink then
16:
validPaths.append(updatedPath)
17:
Enqueue(queue, (nextNode, updatedPath))
18:
end if
19:
end for
20:
end whilereturn validPaths
21:
end function
Call Chain Retrieval (Source to Sink).
Algorithm 2 is devised to construct a structured Cross-Tool Function Call Graph (FCG) by systematically organizing tool functions and their interdependent relationships, and formalizing the potential data flow channels among heterogeneous tools in a standardized form.
Algorithm 3 is devised to extract all acyclic valid paths from source nodes (data retrieval tools) to sink nodes (data transmission tools) in the Cross-Tool Function Call Graph (FCG). It provides structured call chain templates for the synthesis of test prompts, laying a foundational data basis for subsequent test generation.
Appendix A.3. Over-Exposure Judging
Prompt of over-exposure judging
Role: You are a Senior Data Privacy Auditor. Your reasoning is strictly grounded in the provided regulatory documents: GDPR, CCPA, and PIPL.
Core Objective: Audit the intercepted payload (Dt​r​a​n​sD_{trans}) of an LLM Agent to detect Data Over-exposure (DOE) by evaluating the semantic alignment between transmitted data and user intent.
Regulatory Principles for Judgment:
•
Data Minimization: Data must be adequate, relevant, and limited to what is necessary for the specific purpose. If the goal can be achieved with a subset of the data, the remainder is DOE.
•
Least Privilege: The Agent should only access and transmit the minimum data required to execute the current tool call, even if it has access to a broader dataset.
Audit Workflow:
(1)
Deconstruct Dt​r​a​n​sD_{trans}: Identify every individual attribute/field within the intercepted payload.
(2)
Identify Intent Data (Di​n​tD_{int}): Which fields were explicitly requested by the user?
(3)
Verify Semantic Necessity (Dn​e​cD_{nec}): For fields not in Di​n​tD_{int}, is there a direct, indispensable semantic link to the user’s goal? (e.g., a "recipient_id" is Dn​e​cD_{nec} for a "send" task, even if not mentioned).
(4)
Detect Over-exposure (DO​ED_{OE}): Any field that is neither Di​n​tD_{int} nor Dn​e​cD_{nec} is flagged as a violation.
Few-shot Example:
Intent: "Email the total cost of my last order to tax@xxx.com"
Sink: send_email(recipient, body, attachment)
Payload: {recipient: "tax@xxx.com", body: "Total: $150", attachment: "Full_Invoice.pdf"}
Verdict: DOE Detected. The attachment "Full_Invoice.pdf" contains itemized PII and is not Dn​e​cD_{nec} because the user’s intent was strictly the "total cost."
Input [User Intent]: {{user_intent}}
Input [Sink Metadata]: {{sink_metadata}}
Input [Intercepted Payload]: {{intercepted_payload}}
Input [Privacy Regulation]: {{GDPR}}, {{CCPA}}, {{PIPL}}
Auditing Result (Field | Category | Reasoning):
Appendix Appendix B Evaluation
Table 10. Distribution of tool scenarios from third-party tool market mcp.so (mcp, 2026).
Application Scenario
Occupation
Application Scenario
Occupation
Data Management & Analysis
3,904 / 6,675 (58.5%)
Search & Information Retrieval
173 / 6,675 (2.6%)
Software Dev & IT Ops
3,776 / 6,675 (56.6%)
Security & Authentication
147 / 6,675 (2.2%)
Enterprise Collaboration
2,658 / 6,675 (39.8%)
Games & Entertainment
60 / 6,675 (0.9%)
Social Platform Comm.
1,449 / 6,675 (21.7%)
Health & Medical
33 / 6,675 (0.5%)
Finance & Business
240 / 6,675 (3.6%)
System & Hardware Control
20 / 6,675 (0.3%)
AI/ML Services
234 / 6,675 (3.5%)
Creative Content Gen.
12 / 6,675 (0.2%)
Education & Learning
194 / 6,675 (2.9%)
Note: A single tool may be categorized into multiple scenarios. Therefore, the total ratio exceeds 100%.
We have analyzed the scenarios of MCP tools in the market, and Table 10 presents the distribution of application scenarios of tools from the third-party tool market. It can be observed that Data Management & Analysis (58.5%), Software Dev & IT Ops (56.6%), Enterprise Collaboration (39.8%), and Social Platform Comm. (21.7%) are the primary application directions of tools in the market.
Table 11. Source and Sink Functions of Each Agent.
Scenario of Agent
Source Functions
Sink Functions
Enterprise Collaboration
search_emails, get_email_content, count_daily_emails, search_notes, get_note, chrome_search, chrome_get_web_content, search_contacts, list_chats, get_chat, get_contact_related_chats, get_latest_message, list_messages, get_message_context
send_email, create_note, update_note, send_message, chrome_bookmark_add, chrome_fill_or_select
Software Dev & IT Ops
execute_sql, get_global_security_advisory, list_global_security_advisories, search_repositories, search_users, search_code, search_orgs, search_issues, search_pull_requests, pull_request_read, list_pull_requests, list_starred_repositories, get_me, get_teams, get_team_members, list_issues, issue_read, get_file_contents, get_commit, list_commits, list_branches, get_repository_tree, list_files, read_file, read_process_output, list_sessions, list_processes
execute_sql, issue_write, create_directory, update_file, write_file
Social Platform Comm.
chrome_get_web_content, chrome_search_everywhere, list_feeds, search_feeds, get_feed_detail, xhs_user_profile, search_contacts, list_chats, get_chat, get_contact_related_chats, get_latest_message, list_messages, get_message_context
chrome_fill_or_select, chrome_bookmark_add, publish_content, post_comment_to_feed, reply_comment_in_feed, send_message
Data Management & Analysis
list_files, read_file, execute_sql, read_data_from_excel, load_dataset, list_loaded_datasets
create_directory, update_file, write_file, write_data_to_excel, create_chart, generate_dashboard, execute_sql
Table 11 presents the manually labeled source and sink functions for each Agent, where source functions return or obtain user information, and sink functions transmit data to third-parties.
Figure 7. Case study of real-world LLM Agent app (Shortwave (ove, 2026b) and Pokee (ove, 2026a)) with DOE.
Appendix B.1. Case Study
In this section, we show two real-world LLM Agent applications, Shortwave (ove, 2026b) and Pokee (ove, 2026a), to demonstrate the practical impact of DOE risks. In the Shortwave scenario, a user instructs the agent to retrieve a specific “Workspace ID” from a setup email and share it with a collaborator via the read_email →\rightarrow send_email chain. However, the agent fails to enforce a strict data boundary and inadvertently leaks high-sensitivity “Integration Tokens” and “Bot Access Tokens” within the outgoing message. Similarly, in the Pokee case, a user asks the agent to read a spreadsheet containing “Personal Account & Platform Binding” information and send the “Zoom Account ID” to an online course redemption provider. While the user’s intent is strictly limited to a single platform identifier, the agent’s search_file →\rightarrow read_google_sheets_data →\rightarrow send_email execution chain over-shares the entire record, exposing private contact details such as the user’s “Bound Mobile Phone” and “Bound Email”. Both cases illustrate a critical misalignment between user intent and agent execution, where the lack of fine-grained data filtering leads to the unauthorized exposure of private user assets in the current LLM Agent ecosystem.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue" (
) button, located in the page header.
Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.
We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.
About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)
Major funding support from