=== PDF page 2 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
on prefixes from such direct answers (as shown in Fig. 2),
the same LRM shifts from step-by-step reasoning to direct
knowledge retrieval. This uncovers a fundamental prop-
erty of auto-regressive language models: behaviors emerge
dynamically through the interaction between model parame-
ters and the generated context. The initial tokens establish
a behavioral trajectory that the model can naturally con-
tinue, suggesting that LLMs function as adaptive systems
where outputs reflect both learned knowledge and contex-
tual behavioral cues. When examined on a concrete model,
such behavior adaptation instantly improves the accuracy
of Qwen3-30B-A3B-2507-Thinking on SimpleQA bench-
mark (from 18.9 to 20.7), suggesting the potential to build
a general-purpose language model that can adopt the most
suitable behavior for different types of problems.
While token-conditional generation effectively adapts the
behavior, relying on it at inference time requires access
to appropriate prefix examples. Besides, the adaptive be-
havior is transient and unstable, depending on external
conditioning signals. To transform this exposed plastic-
ity into persistent capability, we proposeToken-Conditional
ReinforcementLearning (ToCoRL), a framework thatsta-
bilizesthe chameleon-like adaptability through reinforce-
ment learning. ToCoRL internalizes token-conditional be-
havioral control in a principled manner, enabling models
to autonomously execute appropriate behaviors without
inference-time guidance. Unlike standard RLVR process
(Shao et al., 2024; Williams, 1992), ToCoRL incorporates
token-conditional generation in the roll-out stage. Apart
from the policy-improvement objective, ToCoRL leverages
these token-guided rollouts to compute a customized KL
divergence that shapes exploration toward desired behaviors
while still enhancing exploitation. Consequently, ToCoRL
induces the emergence of the most suitable behavior and
further stabilizes it during the RL process, transforming
ephemeral adaptations into persistent capabilities that mod-
els learn to invoke autonomously.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we fo-
cus on a challenging test case: adapting LRMs to excel at
both complex mathematical reasoning and factual question
answering—two tasks requiring fundamentally different
behavioral strategies. Training with ToCoRL leads to the
emergence of a novel factual-answering behavior, which
shares the best of explicit reasoning and direct-answering
behavior. Starting from Qwen3-30B-A3B-2507-Thinking,
ToCoRL improves accuracy on the SimpleQA benchmark
from 18.9 to 28.3. Moreover, the emergent behavior coexists
with mathematical reasoning capabilities without interfer-
ence, improving accuracy on the AIME’25 benchmark from
80.5 to 81.5, thereby demonstrating that diverse behaviors
can be stabilized within a unified model. Through extensive
experiments and analysis, we provide strong evidence that
ToCoRL is necessary for the emergence of such behavior
and shed light on the underlying mechanisms. Moreover,
when building a versatile LRM from a base model, the dis-
covered behavior pattern can be easily transferred through
supervised fine-tuning.
Our work establishes token-conditional generation as a fun-
damental lens for understanding behavioral adaptability in
LLMs. Different specialized models are not entirely distinct
entities; their performance differences do not necessarily
stem from gaps in knowledge or capability, but may in-
stead arise from differences in behavioral patterns and how
models approach problems. This suggests a paradigm shift:
instead of training separate specialized models, we can pro-
gram diverse behaviors within unified models by learning
to control the token-level patterns that guide behavioral ex-
pression. By revealing and harnessing this chameleon-like
adaptability, we move closer to truly general-purpose AI
systems that flexibly adapt their problem-solving strategies
to match diverse task demands.
2. Preliminaries
Notations in RL for LLMs.LLMs have long been viewed
as policies and optimized via RL (Ouyang et al., 2022; Shao
et al., 2024; Yang et al., 2025), with π commonly used to
denote the LLM policy. There are two common definitions
of actions: sequence-level action and token-level action.
The former treats the entire response sequence as an action
a, with the response space as the action space A. The latter
treats each token as an action, with the vocabulary as the
action space. In this paper, we focus on the sequence-level
action setting, where the state s corresponds to the complete
prompt and the state space S consists of diverse prompts.
The reward r(s, a) maps a prompt–response pair to a scalar
value, and the value function V π(s) and advantage function
Aπ(s, a)are defined as follows,
V π(s) =E a∼π[r(s, a)], A π(s, a) =r(s, a)−V π(s).
REINFORCE Algorithm.Being a classic on-policy RL
algorithm, REINFORCE was first developed in traditional
RL (Williams, 1992; Sutton et al., 1999) and later shown
effective for LLMs (Ahmadian et al., 2024). In traditional
RL settings, REINFORCE derives its objective by taking the
derivative of the expected return J(π θ) with respect to the
parameters θ, where J(π θ) is defined as follows. Here, τ
denotes the rollout trajectory (s0, a0), . . . ,(sT , aT ), and rt
is the reward at step t. The original REINFORCE objective,
denoted J(θ) , is also given below. We note that throughout
this paper, a policy without a subscript denotes a detached
version of its subscripted counterpart (e.g., π is a detached
πθ). In the sequence-level action setting, the trajectory
length is 1 for single-turn dialogues, so only the first step
2

=== PDF page 3 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
Figure 2.Top: Conditioning response generation on a direct-answer prefix enables LRM to switch from step-by-step reasoning to direct
knowledge retrieval, revealing a new perspective on language model behavioral plasticity.Middle: ToCoRL leverages token-conditional
generation to guide exploration during RL training, inducing the emergence of new factual answering behaviors.Bottom: After an initial
direct answer, the ToCoRL-trained model adopts an emergent recalibrative reasoning behavior for factual problems (see Section 5.2),
while its complex math problem–solving behavior remains unchanged. We provide concrete examples for further illustration in Fig. 4.
needs to be considered in this objective,
J(π θ) =E τ∼π(·|s) [
TX
t=0
γt ·r t],
J(θ) =E τ∼π(·|s) [
TX
t=1
Aπ(s, a) logπ θ(a|s)].
3. Exposing Behavioral Plasticity via
Token-Conditional Generation
To better demonstrate the behavioral plasticity of LLMs, we
choose a language model whose behavior is already highly
specialized. This shows that even when a model’s behavior
has been strongly specialized, its behavioral plasticity is
still preserved and can be exposed with appropriate meth-
ods. Therefore, we adopt Qwen3-30B-A3B-2507-Thinking,
a widely used LRM designed for complex reasoning tasks.
It conducts step-by-step reasoning (wrapped by<think> and
</think>), which is exploratory in nature and often involves
trial-and-error or associative content, before producing the
final answer. As shown in Table 7, such reasoning pro-
cess boosts its capability to solve complex math problems
by decomposing them into a sequence of simpler subprob-
lems. On the other hand, this LRM performs much worse
on factual questions compared with its instruct counter-
part, Qwen3-30B-A3B-2507-Instruct. Unlike the Thinking
model, the Instruct model directly answers the questions
without additional reasoning.
We introducetoken-conditional generationto steer the
behavior of the Thinking model. Specifically, given a fac-
tual problem, we first extract the initial tokens of the direct
answer generated by the Instruct model. Conditioning rea-
soning context on this prefix, we then apply the Thinking
model to continue generating subsequent tokens. To avoid
answer leakage, the number of enforced tokens is suffi-
ciently small while still forming a direct attempt to answer
(e.g., 3 tokens). We evaluate the effect of token-conditional
generation with SimpleQA (Wei et al., 2024), a commonly
used factual problem benchmark. The results are reported in
Table 1. Concrete examples, along with a detailed demon-
stration of the procedure, are provided in Appendix C.
Table 1.The following table shows the accuracy (avg@8), the av-
erage response length (Avg. length) and medium response length
(Med. length) in token number, when tested on SimpleQA bench-
mark. Note that we use ‘Normal Gen’ and ‘ToCo Gen’ to denote
normal generation and token-conditional generation respectively.
Accuracy Avg. length Med. length
The Normal Gen 18.9% 1255 1128
ToCo Gen 20.7% 891 477
The examples clearly demonstrate that, through token-
conditional generation, the Thinking model tends to an-
swer factual questions directly, skipping step-by-step rea-
soning. Table 1 shows that once its behavior is shifted, the
Thinking model’s performance on factual questions also
improves, with significant decrease in the response length.
This inference-time editing requires no additional training
and introduces no new knowledge, so the performance gains
and the decrease of response length can only be attributed
to the model’s inherent behavioral plasticity.
Specifically in this case, the Thinking model’s original rea-
soning style is not helpful for factual queries and can even
hinder knowledge retrieval. Unlike complex math problems
that require step-by-step reasoning to bridge the abstract
problem and the correct answer, factual questions only re-
quire instruction-following skills, and the question-answer
mapping usually exists in the pre-training corpus. Without
3

=== PDF page 4 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
controlling the reasoning process, unnecessary associations
and unverified information, including potential hallucina-
tions, may be introduced and mislead the model. Token-
conditional generation leverages the behavioral plasticity,
adapting the model’s behavior to answer directly and con-
sicely, thereby improving performance.
4. ToCoRL: Internalize Behavior Adaptation
with Guided Exploration
The aforementioned behavioral plasticity endows a single
language model with the potential to exhibit diverse behav-
iors. Nevertheless, this inference-time operation relies on
pre-generated responses, and its effects are unstable and tran-
sient; moreover, it does not provide sufficient control over
the subsequent tokens after token-forcing. To remedy this,
we propose a novel RL-based method, Token-Conditional
Reinforcement Learning (ToCoRL), which internalizes the
above behavior adaptation, transforming transient behavior
shifts into stable, learnable behavioral patterns.
4.1. Incorporate Guidance from Token-Conditional
Generation via KL-Divergence
We develop ToCoRL from a KL-constrained RL objective,
incorporating guidance from token-conditional generation
to discover the most suitable behavioral pattern. KL diver-
gence with a specific policy has long been used to guide
exploration in on-policy RL (Rajeswaran et al., 2017; Nair
et al., 2020). For example, when taking expert policy as the
reference, the augmented KL divergence effectively guides
the policy toward high-reward regions of the strategy space
(Peng et al., 2018). In our setting, although the policy in-
duced by token-conditional generation exhibits desirable
behaviors, it does not qualify as an expert policy. As a re-
sult, we formulate our optimization objective below, where
the KL divergence is calculated with a customized policy.
maxE
s∼D
 E
a∼π
[Aπ(s, a) logπ θ(a|s)]−λKL(˜πTC||πθ)

,
∀s, a˜πTC(a|s) =π(a|s) +ρ s ·π TC(a|s)·A πTC (s, a),
∀s ρ s = min
a∈A, AπTC (s,a)<0
{ −π(a|s)
πTC(a|s)·A πTC (s, a) }.
(1)
The objective contains two terms, the first being the REIN-
FORCE objective commonly used in RL for LLMs. (Ahma-
dian et al., 2024; Schulman et al., 2017). In the second KL
divergence term, the reference policy˜πTC is the composition
of the current policy π and the policy induced from token-
conditional generation, i.e. πTC. Despite its seemingly
complex form, ˜πTC is well-defined under mild conditions,
as established by the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1.Given that for every state s, there exists an
action a such that AπTC(s, a)̸= 0 , the policy ˜πTC(a|s) is
well-defined.
We provide the proof in Appendix F. Since AπTC (s, a) = 0
holds for all a only when all answers yield the same reward,
this assumption holds in almost all cases as long as the query
is meaningful. We then proceed to justify the advantage of
the optimization objective along two main aspects.
First, the interaction between the policy gradient term and
the KL constraint term drives flexible and stable behavior
adaptation. Early in training, the KL term injects the target
behavior, inducing behavioral imitation of correct responses
from token-conditional generation. As the model’s behavior
gradually shifts, standard rollouts in the policy gradient term
also exhibit the target behavior. As a result, the policy gra-
dient term internalizes the externally acquired behavior into
an intrinsic model behavior that facilitates policy improve-
ment, which in turn improves token-conditional generation.
The KL coefficient regulates off-policy gradients to ensure
training stability and avoid unintended behavior shifts.
Second, the KL divergence enables correctness-aware
guided exploration in a computationally tractable manner.
From the definition of ˜πTC in Eq. (1), it’s evident that
˜πTC(a|s)> π(a|s) when AπTC (s, a)>0 , and ˜πTC(a|s)<
π(a|s) when AπTC(s, a)<0 . In the 0/1 reward setting, a
response has a positive advantage if and only if it is correct
(Shao et al., 2024). Consequently, responses explored by
˜πTC are reinforced if they yield right answers and suppressed
otherwise, thereby biasing exploration toward correctness.
4.2. Practical Implementation
In practice, while direct sampling from ˜πTC to compute
the KL divergence is intractable, the following theorem
provides an alternative implementation that relies only on
samples fromπ TC, making the objective tractable.
Theorem 4.2.From the perspective of the energy function
underlying π(·|s), the following two objectives share the
same gradient.
Obj. 1:−KL(˜π TC(·|s)||πθ(·|s)),
Obj. 2:ρ s ·E a∼πTC(·|s)[AπTC(s, a)·logπ θ(a|s)]. (2)
The proof is given in Appendix F. Theorem 2 quantita-
tively characterizes the correctness-aware property of the
customized KL divergence, using a tractable policy-gradient-
style objective. We note that when π(a|s) is an LLM with
billions of parameters, analyzing exact gradients for all pa-
rameters becomes infeasible. Nevertheless, the analysis
from the perspective of the energy function is generally ap-
plicable to any discrete distribution. Based on Theorem 2,
we rewrite Eq. (1) into the following objective,
4

=== PDF page 5 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
maxE s∼D

Ea∼π(·|s)[Aπ(s, a)·logπ θ(a|s)]
+λ·ρ s ·E a∼πTC(·|s)[AπTC(s, a)·logπ θ(a|s)]

. (3)
To avoid separately estimating two advantages (i.e.,Aπ(s, a)
and AπTC(s, a)), we merge the two policy-gradient objec-
tives in Eq.(3) into a single surrogate objective in Eq.(4),
with πmix defined below. Response generation and advan-
tage estimation in Eq. (4) relies solely on a mixed policy.
This significantly reduces the variance of advantage esti-
mation, especially when the advantages are estimated via
Monte Carlo sampling (as in our implementation), and the
number of samples is usually limited due to computational
constraints. To justify its soundness, we first note that the
objectives in Eq.(3) and Eq.(4) share the same rollout distri-
bution. Moreover, Theorem 4.4 shows that the gap between
the objective in Eq. (3) and its surrogate in Eq. (4) is well
controlled. To this end, we defineπ mix andϕ s below.
Definition 4.3.We define the mixed policy πmix :=π+˜λs·πTC
1+˜λs
,
and the scalar constant ϕs := min{
˜λs
(1+˜λs)2 , 1
(1+˜λs)2 }. Note
that ˜λs =λ·ρ s.
Theorem 4.4. ∀s∈ D , define A+
s ⊆ A as the set of correct
responses for querys. The following inequality holds:
Ea∼πmix

1[a∈ A +
s ]·A πmix(s, a)·logπ θ(a|s)

≤ϕ s·
h
Ea∼π(·|s)

1[a∈ A +
s ]·A π(s, a)·logπ θ(a|s)

+
˜λs ·E a∼πTC(·|s)

1[a∈ A +
s ]·A πTC (s, a)·logπ θ(a|s)
i
.
The proof is provided in Appendix F. Theorem 4.4 implies
that, for all correct answers, the surrogate objective in Eq.(4)
can lower-bounds the objective in Eq.(3), thereby providing
a guarantee for its maximization. Intuitively, this connec-
tion arises because Aπ, AπTC, and Aπmix share the same
signs under 0/1 rewards—positive for correct responses and
negative otherwise. In conclusion, we present the practical
optimization objective below, where πmix remains as previ-
ously defined. For simplicity of implementation, ˜λs is set to
a fixed positive valueλacross all states.
maxE s∼D

Ea∼πmix[Aπmix(s, a)·logπ θ(a|s)]

,
Aπmix(s, ai) =r(s, a i)−mean
 
{r(s, ai)}G
i=1

.
(4)
4.3. Algorithmic Instantiation: Evolving Reasoning
Behavior for Factual Problem Solving
We leverage ToCoRL to build a LRM that achieves superhu-
man performance factual problem solving, a setting where
prior reasoning models often underperform. ToCoRL inter-
nalizes the performance-enhancing behavior shift described
in Section 3 and induces the emergence of a novel reasoning
behavior suitable for factual problems. Specifically, π is
set as a LRM and another instruct model πInst provides the
token prefixes. The token-conditional generation process is
illustrated in Appendix C and formulated as follows,
˜o1...k :=<think>\n ⊕ o′
1...k−2, o ′
1...k−2 ∼ πInst(O′
1...k−2|s),
o ∼ πTC(O|s) := ˜o1...k ⊕ o>k, o >k ∼ π(O>k|s,˜o1...k).
To avoid confusion with advantage, we use O to denote the
response as a random variable. ⊕ denotes concatenation.
We set the <think> token as the first token of the prefix,
which should be discarded when applying ToCoRL to other
model types. Since rule-based rewards are not applicable
for factual problems, we employ LLM-as-a-judge to provide
reward signals. The reward is binary (0 or 1), taking value 1
only when the generated answer is equivalent to the ground
truth. The evaluation details and the pseudo-code of this
instantiation are provided in Section E.2.
Note that ToCoRL is not limited to enhancing factual prob-
lem solving capability. For other tasks where the desired
behavior can be encoded in token prefixes, ToCoRL can
take effect by seamlessly injecting the target behavior and
evolving the most effective behavioral pattern.
5. Experiments
We focus the experiments on the aforementioned test case:
adapting an LRM’s behavior to perform well on both com-
plex reasoning tasks and factual problem solving. To demon-
strate the effectiveness and underlying mechanisms of To-
CoRL, as well as its implications for building versatile rea-
soning models, we address several key research questions.
These questions can be grouped into four aspects as below.
RQ1: What performance improvements and behavioral
changes does ToCoRL bring to LRMs?
RQ2: Through what underlying mechanisms do the perfor-
mance improvements and behavioral changes arise?
RQ3: Are performance improvements and behavioral adap-
tations robust to changes in algorithmic factors? (e.g.,
hyperparameters, alternative prefix providers)
RQ4: Are the emergent behaviors transferable and ex-
ploitable by other models to solve factual problems?
5.1. Effective Performance Improvement and Emergent
Reasoning Behavior (RQ1)
We use Qwen3-30B-A3B-2507-Thinking as the starting
point for training, and Qwen3-235B-A22B-2507-Instruct as
the token prefix provider for token-conditional generation.
Our training data consist of two components.
For factual problem solving, we use 10K factual query-
5

=== PDF page 6 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
answer pairs. In addition, to further strengthen complex
mathematical reasoning capability and to examine the inter-
action between factual and math training, we jointly train
on 10K math query-answer pairs. The evaluation is based
on widely-used benchmarks comprising two correspond-
ing components. For factual problems, we use SimpleQA
benchmark (Wei et al., 2024) and AA-Omniscience bench-
mark (Jackson et al., 2025). For mathematical reasoning, we
evaluate on AIME’24 and AIME’25. To mitigate evaluation
variance given the limited data, we test average accuracy
over 32 evaluations (Avg@32) for math queries.
To thoroughly demonstrate ToCoRL’s effectiveness, we con-
duct a comparative study against various baseline RL-for-
LLM algorithms. The baseline algorithms are as follows:
• GRPO: an representative RL algorithm, especially under
the verifiable reward setting.
• Adaptive-Thinking: an RL algorithm biasing the response
toward conciseness via a length-based advantage penalty.
• Instruct-Tuning GRPO: built on GRPO, we modify the
rollout stage by adding a manually designed instruction at
the end of each prompt, encouraging the LRM to reason
adaptively according to the difficulty of the query.
We provide the details of the baseline algorithms, selec-
tion rationales, and additional experimental settings, in Ap-
pendix E. During the joint training process described above,
we apply ToCoRL and the baseline methods only to factual-
problem training, while using GRPO uniformly for training
on math problems. In Table 2, we report the accuracy across
different benchmarks after training process converge.
Table 2.Evaluation results for experiments based on Qwen3-30B-
A3B-2507-Thinking. We use ‘Thinking’ and ‘Instruct’ to denote
the corresponding two open-source models, and ‘w.’ to denote
the training method used for factual problem queries. ‘Adapt-
Think’, ‘I-T GRPO’, and ‘Omnisci’ are abbreviations for Adaptive-
Thinking, Instruct-Tuning GRPO, and AA-Omniscience, respec-
tively, and we consistently use these notations in subsequent tables.
Qwen3-30A3B SimpleQA Omnisci AIME’24 AIME’25
Thinking 18.9 16.1 84.8 80.5
Instruct 22.1 10.5 75.2 61.3
w. ToCoRL 28.3 18.689.081.5
w. GRPO 23.6 16.789.581.4
w. Adapt-Think 23.9 16.0 86.9 78.9
w. I-T GRPO 21.1 14.8 87.8 80.4
As is shown in Table 2, ToCoRL demonstrates significant
superiority in improving the capability of factual problem
solving, compared with other baseline methods. While
ToCoRL only marginally affects reasoning performance,
Adaptive-Thinking and Instruct-Tuning GRPO incur no-
ticeable performance drops on complex math benchmarks.
Besides such quantitative results, we qualitatively analyze
the change in behavioral patterns by examining different
models’ responses to the same factual problem set. Due to
limited space, we present detailed analysis in Appendix G.
After training with ToCoRL, the LRM consistently starts its
response with a direct answer. It then tends to perform recal-
ibrative reasoning, where it repeatedly generates answers it
currently deems to be correct, uses them as context for sub-
sequent generation, and terminates with a summary once it
becomes confident in the answer. Unlike Qwen3-30B-A3B-
2507-Thinking, the ToCoRL-induced reasoning remains
tightly focused on the question itself—not for proving or
justification, but for retrieving the correct answer—thus
avoiding unnecessary associations and unverified informa-
tion. For complex math problems, ToCoRL induces only
minor behavioral changes, consistent with its steady im-
provements on the AIME benchmarks. Intuitively, this is
because token-conditional generation only produce content
that is highly specific to the corresponding factual problems,
which is hard to affect training on math queries.
5.2. Underlying Mechanisms of Performance and
Behavioral Emergence in ToCoRL (RQ2)
Figure 3.For clearer visualization, we plot the curves of these
metrics over the first training epoch. Compared to ToCoRL, GRPO
extends reasoning length while keeping the original reasoning
style. Since unnecessary associations and unverified information
persist, longer reasoning yields minor improvements, and response
lengths eventually return to their initial levels. Adaptive-Thinking
penalizes all reasoning, so evaluation scores rise quickly at first
as ineffective context is removed. However, without additional
reasoning capacity, the LRM’s potential is underutilized, limiting
further gains. Instruct-tuning RL initially shortens reasoning, but
the prompt instruction gradually loses control over the behavior.
While ToCoRL yields substantial performance improve-
ments and seemingly out-of-nowhere emergent behaviors,
these outcomes are in fact driven by principled mechanisms.
To analyze the mechanisms, a case-by-case analysis is in-
feasible due to the thousands of factual-problem queries
used for training and evaluation. Nevertheless, the trends of
several response-length–based metrics, along with response
examples from different stages of training, clearly explain
these mechanisms. As a result, based on the experiments in
Section 5.1, we trace these metrics and accuracy under Sim-
pleQA benchmark along the training in Fig. 3. The response
examples in different stages are presented in Appendix H.
We focus on two length-based metrics: the average and min-
6

=== PDF page 7 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
imum response lengths across the evaluation dataset. Early
in training (steps 0 to around 40), ToCoRL rapidly reduces
both metrics. This occurs because token-conditional gen-
eration forces the LRM to produce a direct answer at the
beginning, after which it tends to summarize, resulting in
significantly shorter responses. As shown in Section 3, such
behavior outperforms the original step-by-step reasoning
on factual problems. The reward-maximizing nature of RL
quickly reinforces the direct-answer behavior, further reduc-
ing both length metrics (supported by response examples in
Appendix H). In other words, score improvements at this
stage primarily stem from eliminating spurious reasoning
content, adopting a concise reasoning behavior.
Subsequently, while the minimum response length stays low,
the mean response length gradually increases. For simple
problems, the LRM often retrieves the correct answer on the
first attempt, and additional reasoning only hinders retrieval,
keeping responses short. For difficult problems, one-shot
retrieval fails, so the LRM extends the reasoning context
to find the correct answer. RL continuously incentivizes
the LRM to adopt the most effective reasoning behavior,
leading it to revise answers using only the necessary context,
thus preserving the advantage of the direct-answer behavior
mentioned earlier. At this stage, ToCoRL guides the LRM in
deciding when to trust its current answer candidate and when
to generate alternatives, resulting in improved evaluation
scores as reasoning capability is better utilized.
Table 3.Results for experiments based on Qwen3-30B-A3B-SFT,
obtained by enabling the base model (denoted as ‘Base’) with a
unified reasoning behavior. We refer to it as ‘SFT’ for brevity.
Qwen3-30A3B SimpleQA Omnisci AIME’24 AIME’25
Base 24.2 12.0 15.1 9.4
SFT 19.6 14.0 56.5 38.7
w. ToCoRL 28.1 15.8 72.161.7
w. GRPO 22.6 14.3 72.061.9
w. Adapt-Think 24.8 13.8 47.9 30.4
w. I-T GRPO 21.7 12.9 56.0 37.8
One concern is that the aforementioned mechanisms may
only apply to Qwen3-30B-A3B-2507-Thinking, or that the
emergent behavior pre-exists in this model due to its diverse
training data. To address this, we start from the base model
and use SFT to enable a unified reasoning behavior distinct
from that learned by ToCoRL (details in Appendix I). Such
enabled behavior is associative, aiding mathematical rea-
soning but can hinder knowledge retrieval. We then repeat
the experiments in Section 5.1. Results in Tab. 3 show
that ToCoRL still substantially improves factual problem-
solving performance, surpassing all baselines. As shown in
Appendix J, the emergent behavior mirrors that in Section
5.1. Moreover, while Adaptive-Thinking reduces response
length, unnecessary associations are still included in the
limited reasoning context, highlighting the necessity of To-
CoRL for achieving the desired reasoning behavior.
5.3. Robustness of ToCoRL (RQ3)
To validate the robustness of ToCoRL, we conduct an ab-
lation study to examine the influence of key factors on the
algorithm (e.g., hyperparameters, token prefix provider). As
shown in the pseudo-code in Algorithm 1, the main tunable
factors are KL coefficientλ, token prefix lengthk, and token
prefix provider πInst. We test each factor individually while
keeping all others consistent with the settings in Section 5.1.
The evaluation scores are summarized below.
Table 4.Results for ablation studies on hyperparameters ( λ and
k). We skip testing k <6 since the required <think>\n prefix
(occupying 2 tokens) makes the prefix too short to form a direct
attempt at answering the problem.
(λ, k) SimpleQA Omnisci AIME’24 AIME’25
(1,6) 28.3 18.6 89.0 81.5
(1,7) 27.5 18.1 88.2 80.6
(1,8) 27.6 18.3 88.5 80.9
(0.5,6) 28.1 18.3 88.3 80.5
(2,6) 27.2 17.8 88.0 80.0
Table 5.Results for ablation studies on different prefix providers
(πInst). For brevity, the ‘Instruct’ suffix is omitted for all models.
Note that Qwen3 models in the table refer to the 2507 version.
πInst SimpleQA Omnisci AIME’24 AIME’25
Qwen3-235A22B 28.3 18.6 89.0 81.5
Qwen3-30A3B 28.0 18.6 89.1 81.3
Qwen2.5-14B 27.8 18.3 89.0 81.1
Table 4 clearly demonstrates ToCoRL’s robustness to hy-
perparameters, with only minor performance fluctuations as
the values of λ and k vary. The results in Table 5 show that,
when using less capable models as token prefix providers,
ToCoRL still achieves consistent improvements. Moreover,
the emergent behavior is nearly identical across different
choices of πInst. Intuitively, ToCoRL’s efficacy is almost
independent of πInst’s capacity, as long as the initial tokens
attempt to provide a direct answer. Besides, while the pre-
fix steers the initial direct-answer segment, the rest of the
reasoning is fully determined by the model itself.
5.4. Transferring Emergent Behavior for Effective LRM
Training (RQ4)
Previous experiments have demonstrated that, given an
LRM, ToCoRL can boost factual problem-solving capa-
bility by adapting its reasoning behavior. However, it would
be restrictive if every LRM had to undergo ToCoRL training
to acquire the aforementioned behavior. A more common
and effective strategy for acquiring specific behaviors is to
7

=== PDF page 8 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
first distill them into a dataset and then apply supervised
fine-tuning from a base model. We show that the emergent
behavior induced by ToCoRL is well suited to this strategy.
Specifically, we first construct a new SFT dataset based
on the one used in the experiments in Table 3. The math-
problem SFT data is kept unchanged, while the responses
for factual problems are regenerated using the model trained
via ToCoRL in Table 2. For comparison, we construct
two additional datasets using Qwen3-235B-A22B-Instruct
and Qwen3-30B-A3B-Instruct. These datasets share the
same math SFT data, and for factual responses, the instruct
models’ outputs are treated as reasoning context, while sum-
maries are generated by prompting another LLM to summa-
rize the reasoning (details in Appendix K). Using these SFT
datasets and starting from the same base model as in Table
3, we conduct SFT and run the same set of experiments. For
a fair comparison and to minimize the influence of the RL
algorithm on behavioral patterns, we consistently use GRPO
for training. We report the scores in Table 6, presenting the
training curves and response examples in Appendix K.
Table 6.We use ’Response Provider’ to denote the source of the
factual responses used for new SFT datasets as described above.
All providers are from the Qwen3 series; * indicates manually
constructed responses, otherwise are generated normally.
Response Provider SimpleQA Omnisci AIME’24 AIME’25
30A3B-w. ToCoRL 29.1 16.0 74.5 62.0
235A22B-Instruct* 28.3 15.5 68.6 55.2
30A3B-Instruct* 25.3 14.5 69.3 59.2
These results highlight the superiority of ToCoRL-
discovered reasoning behavior in two aspects. First, the
model’s factual problem-solving capability improves sig-
nificantly and immediately after SFT, without additional
RL training. This highlights the strong transferability of
the behavior and underscores its value for factual problem
solving: although the regenerated responses are not guaran-
teed to be correct, the reasoning behavior itself enhances
the base model’s accuracy in knowledge retrieval. Second,
the reasoning behavior is highly extensible. After the RL
stage, the LRM equipped with the ToCoRL-discovered be-
havior achieves the largest accuracy gains and surpasses all
baseline models. Moreover, it coexists compatibly with the
behaviors in math-problem SFT data, leading to the greatest
performance improvements on complex math benchmarks.
6. Related Works
LLM Behavior Plasticity and Steering MethodsPre-
trained on vast data sources, LLMs possess the plasticity
to exhibit diverse behaviors depending on the elicitation
method (Raffel et al., 2020; Yang et al., 2025). This plastic-
ity stems from training billions of parameters on massive
data, using text as a unified medium for learning and mem-
orization (Chung et al., 2024). To steer model behavior,
post-training techniques generally fall into two categories.
The first involves parameter updates—such as SFT (Radford
et al., 2018), RLHF (Ouyang et al., 2022), and Preference
Optimization (Rafailov et al., 2023)—which controllably
guide the model toward target behaviors pre-existing in the
data. Conversely, prompt engineering and in-context learn-
ing steer behavior without parameter updates (Brown et al.,
2020; Wei et al., 2022), offering flexibility while sacrificing
controllability and stability. ToCoRL shares the advantages
of both: it does not require the target behavior to pre-exist
and provides precise control over the induced behavior.
Reinforcement Learning Algorithms and Applications
in LLMReinforcement learning algorithms typically op-
timizes an agent’s objective of maximizing cumulative re-
wards (Schulman et al., 2015; Haarnoja et al., 2018). In the
classic online setting, the agent interacts with an environ-
ment to collect data for policy updates (Mnih et al., 2015).
This paradigm is well-suited for LLMs, where environment
dynamics consist of simple token concatenation and roll-
outs are highly parallelizable (Ouyang et al., 2022; Qwen
et al., 2025). Consequently, Proximal Policy Optimization
(PPO) (Schulman et al., 2017) was among the first online
RL algorithms applied to instruction tuning (Ouyang et al.,
2022). Other methods, such as REINFORCE (Williams,
1992), have also proven effective for fine-tuning (Ahmadian
et al., 2024). More recently, Group Relative Policy Opti-
mization (GRPO) (Shao et al., 2024) and its variants (Yang
et al., 2025; Guo et al., 2025) dispense with the traditional
value network for advantage estimation, relying instead on
relative rewards. This approach has demonstrated particular
efficacy in domains with verifiable rewards.
7. Conclusion & Discussion
In this paper, we reveal the behavior plasticity of LLMs from
a novel perspective. By leveraging token-conditional gen-
eration, a language model’s behavior can seamlessly adapt
to a different one, provided with a prefix of the response ex-
hibiting the desired behavior. Based on this, we developed
ToCoRL, a RL-based algorithm that stabilizes and internal-
izes such behavior adaptation, enabling the emergence of
more effective behavioral patterns. Focusing on adapting
the LRM’s behavior to excel at both complex reasoning
tasks and factual problem solving, we conduct extensive
experiments to demonstrate ToCoRL’s effectiveness, under-
lying mechanisms, robustness and transferability. Due to
computational constraints, we do not evaluate ToCoRL on a
broader range of tasks. Nevertheless, token-conditional gen-
eration is evidently applicable to a wide variety of settings.
Our future work will extend ToCoRL to a wider range of
tasks and different types of language models.
8

=== PDF page 15 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
of Art is distinct. So, the answer should be 2023, with the more precise date of
November. Including the month adds value beyond just the year.
Finally, ensure that the response clearly states the year and the month, avoiding any
doubt. So the answer is November 2023, meaning the year is 2023.
</think>
Melbourne’s Monash Gallery of Art (MGA)**rebranded to the Museum of Australian
Photography (MAPh) in November 2023**.
The official announcement was made on **November 16, 2023**, marking the culmination
of a strategic shift to focus exclusively on Australian photography. The gallery,
located on the Monash University campus in Melbourne, had operated under the MGA
name since its establishment in 1999. The rebranding reflected its dedication to
collecting, exhibiting, and promoting Australian photographic art, with a renewed
emphasis on its national significance.
**Key details**: - **Year**: 2023 (though the change took effect in late 2023).
- **Date of announcement**: November 16, 2023. - **Reason**: To clarify its
specialized mission in Australian photography, moving beyond the broader "art" focus
of the previous name.
This rebranding was widely covered in Australian arts media (e.g., *The Age*,
*ABC Arts*) and cemented MAPh’s identity as Australia’s first dedicated museum
for photography. The transition included new branding, exhibitions, and programs
centered on Australian photographers.
*Note: While 2023 is the correct year, some early announcements (e.g., in late 2022)
were misreported; the official rebrand occurred in 2023.*
D. Pesudo-code
Algorithm 1Pseudo-code for algorithmic instantiation: evolving reasoning behavior for factual problem solving
Require:Large Reasoning Model π, Instruct Model πInst, Judger Model πjudge, factual problem query-answer pairs
D={(s, o gt)i}N
i=1, augmented datasetD ′ (initially empty)
Hyperparameter:KL coefficient λ >0 , token prefix length k, rollout group size G, batch size B, gradient step number
T
fors∈ Ddo
#Pre-generate one response withπ Inst
o′ ←π Inst(O′|s)
Augment the query with the response:(s, o gt, o′), and add it intoD ′
end for
fort= 1, . . . , Tdo
Sample a batch{(s, o gt, o′)j}B
j=1 from augmented datasetD ′ ={(s, o gt, o′)i}N
i=1
for(s, o gt, o′)indata batch{(s, o gt, o′)j}B
j=1 do
forg= 1, . . . , Gdo
#sample response from the mixed policyπ mix in Eq. 4
Sampleu∼Uniform(0,1)
ifu < 1
1+λ then
Normally sample response from the LRM, i.e.,o g ∼π(O|s)
else
Sample with token-conditional generation:
Construct token prefix:˜o1...k :=<think>\n⊕o ′
1...k−2
Continue generation:o g ∼π TC(O|s) := ˜o1...k ⊕o g
>k, o g
>k ∼π(O >k|s,˜o1...k)
end if
#Evaluate responseothrough LLM-as-a-judge
rg =π judge(s, ogt, og)
end for
Gather reward batch{(s, o g, rg)}G
g=1 for current data sample and calculate advantages based on Eq. 4
end for
Compute the optimization objective in Eq. 4, perform parameter update accoring to its gradient
end for
15

=== PDF page 16 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
E. Experimental Details
E.1. Details & Selection Rationale of Baseline Methods
GRPO:Developed from Proximal-Policy Optimization (PPO), GRPO discards the value network by estimating advantages
using the average reward within a group of sampled responses. Its optimization objective can be formulated as follows. Note
that ToCoRL shares the same advantage estimation method with GRPO. We choose GRPO as one of the baseline methods
because comparing it with ToCoRL highlights the superiority of our method over standard RLVR algorithms.
JGRP O(θ) =E s∼D
{oi}G
i=1∼πold(O|q)
"
1
G
GX
i=1

min
 πθ(oi|q)
πold(oi|q)
ˆAi,clip
 πθ(oi|q)
πold(oi|q) ,1−ϵ,1 +ϵ

ˆAi

−βKL(π θ||πref )
#
ˆAi = ri −mean({r 1, r2, . . . , rG})
std({r1, r2, . . . , rG})
Adaptive-Thinking:To demonstrate that ToCoRL’s effectiveness does not simply comes from the conciseness induced by
forcing an initial direct answer, we choose Adaptive-Thinking as one of the baseline methods. Adaptive-Thinking methods
are initially developed to reduce the token usage in reasoning while maintaining or improving the performance, in order to
boost the efficiency of the reasoning models. Among various Adaptive-Thinking methods, one of the most common way is
to add a length-based penalty into the reward or advantage calculation (Team et al., 2025; Arora & Zanette, 2025).
Similarly, we add a length-based penalty to the reward calculation, which can be formulated as follows. The rest of this
method follows GRPO.
r(s, a)←r(s, a)−η·

|areasoning| − |a∗
reasoning|

, a∗ = min
a∈{ai}G
i=1,ais correct
|areasoning|(5)
We use areasoning to denote the reasoning context of the response, and use | · | to denote the length of the context. a∗ represent
the correct response with a minimum reasoning context length, among the rollout response group {ai}G
i=1. In this way, the
magnitude of the penalty is determined solely by the length of the reasoning context, preventing that the summary is also
excessively compressed. Moreover, when all the generated responses are incorrect (i.e. a∗ does not exist), length penalty
is 0 for all responses, otherwise some incorrect responses with shorter reasoning context will be reinforced. We use η to
control the scale of the penalty, consistently using 1e-3 across all the experiments for this method. Since Table 1 shows that
the average response length of Qwen3-30B-A3B-2507-Thinking for factual problems is around 1K, such a choice of η is
reasonable.
Instruct-Tuning GRPO:As mentioned before, prompt engineering is also a prominent branch of steering language model
behavior. Consequently, we compare ToCoRL with such a method to demonstrate its stability and controllability. Specifically,
after the factual problem, we add a manually constructed instruction, encouraging the language model to reason adaptively
according to the complexity of the problem. We provide the complete query construction as follows. Except for this change
in the input query, other algorithmic designs follow GRPO, as listed above.
1<|im_start|>user
2FACTUAL PROBLEM
3To answer the question, please adjust the length of your thought. If the question is
difficult, please think thoroughly. If the question is easy, please directly answer.
4<|im_end|>
5<|im_start|>assistant
E.2. Details of LLM-as-a-judge
We first provide details of LLM-as-a-judge used in evaluation. Specifically, we strictly follow the evaluation templates used
in SimpleQA and AA-Omniscience when testing on them. Due to limited space, we didn’t present them here; please refer
to their original papers for full templates. In the template of SimpleQA, ‘question’, ‘target’ and ‘predictedanswer’ are
three key segments to be filled (similar in the template of AA-Omniscience). While it’s straightforward to fill ‘question’
and ‘target’, for ‘predictedanswer’, we extract the summary of the responses for the reasoning models and directly use
the responses for the non-reasoning models. For the judger model, we use gpt-4o-2024-08-06 on the SimpleQA
benchmark, and usegemini-2.5-flashon the AA-Omniscience benchmark.
16

=== PDF page 17 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
For the reward calculation during factual-query training, we follow the template used in SimpleQA. For the judger model,
we also usegpt-4o-2024-08-06. We list the complete template as below. From the template, it’s evident that only
when the response provides correct answer (the judger model outputs ‘A’) can it receive a reward of 1, otherwise will receive
a reward of 0. We note that the capability of the judger model can influence the training process. Less capable judge models
may misclassify excessively long but incorrect responses as correct, leading to reward hacking and misleading the language
model during training.
1Your job is to look at a question, a gold target, and a predicted answer, and then assign
a grade of either ["CORRECT", "INCORRECT", "NOT_ATTEMPTED"].
2First, I will give examples of each grade, and then you will grade a new example.
3
4
5The following are examples of CORRECT predicted answers.
6‘‘‘
7Question: What are the names of Barack Obama’s children?
8Gold target: Malia Obama and Sasha Obama
9Predicted answer 1: sasha and malia obama
10Predicted answer 2: most people would say Malia and Sasha, but I’m not sure and would have
to double check
11Predicted answer 3: Barack Obama has two daughters. Their names are Malia Ann and Natasha
Marian, but they are commonly referred to as Malia Obama and Sasha Obama. Malia was
born on July 4, 1998, and Sasha was born on June 10, 2001.
12‘‘‘
13These predicted answers are all CORRECT because:
14- They fully contain the important information in the gold target.
15- They do not contain any information that contradicts the gold target.
16- Only semantic meaning matters; capitalization, punctuation, grammar, and order don’t
matter.
17- Hedging and guessing are permissible, provided that the gold target is fully
included and the response contains no incorrect information or contradictions.
18
19
20The following are examples of INCORRECT predicted answers.
21‘‘‘
22Question: What are the names of Barack Obama’s children?
23Gold target: Malia and Sasha
24Predicted answer 1: Malia.
25Predicted answer 2: Malia, Sasha, and Susan.
26Predicted answer 3: Barack Obama does not have any children.
27Predicted answer 4: I think it’s either Malia and Sasha. Or it could be Malia and Jackie.
Or it could be Joey and Malia.
28Predicted answer 4: While I don’t know their exact names, I can tell you that Barack Obama
has three children.
29Predicted answer 5: It’s possible you may mean Betsy and Olivia. However, you should
clarify further details with updated references if necessary. Is that the correct
answer?
30Predicted answer 6: It may be the case that Obama’s child is named James. However, it’s
recommended to confirm the most accurate and updated information since this could
change over time. This model may not always reflect the most current information.
31‘‘‘
32These predicted answers are all INCORRECT because:
33- A factual statement in the answer contradicts the gold target. Incorrect statements
that have some hedging (e.g., "it is possible that", "although i’m not sure, i
think") are also considered incorrect.
34
35
36The following are examples of NOT_ATTEMPTED predicted answers.
37‘‘‘
38Question: What are the names of Barack Obama’s children?
39Gold target: Malia and Sasha
40Predicted answer 1: I don’t know.
41Predicted answer 2: I need more context about which Obama you are talking about.
42Predicted answer 3: Without researching the web, I cannot answer this question. However, I
can tell you that Barack Obama has two children.
17

=== PDF page 18 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
43Predicted answer 4: Barack Obama has two children. I know that one of them is Malia, but I
’m not sure about the other one.
44‘‘‘
45These predicted answers are all NOT_ATTEMPTED because:
46- The important information in the gold target is not included in the answer.
47- No statements in the answer contradict the gold target.
48
49
50Also note the following things:
51- For grading questions where the gold target is a number, the predicted answer needs to
be correct to the last significant figure in the gold answer. For example, consider a
question "How many citations does the Transformer Paper have?" with gold target "120k
".
52- Predicted answers "120k", "124k", and 115k" are all CORRECT.
53- Predicted answers "100k" and "113k" are INCORRECT.
54- Predicted answers "around 100k" and "more than 50k" are considered NOT_ATTEMPTED
because they neither confirm nor contradict the gold target.
55- The gold target may contain more information than the question. In such cases, the
predicted answer only needs to contain the information that is in the question.
56- For example, consider the question "What episode did Derek and Meredith get legally
married in Grey’s Anatomy?" with gold target "Season 7, Episode 20: White Wedding
". Either "Season 7, Episode 20" or "White Wedding" would be considered a CORRECT
answer.
57- Do not punish predicted answers if they omit information that would be clearly inferred
from the question.
58- For example, consider the question "What city is OpenAI headquartered in?" and the
gold target "San Francisco, California". The predicted answer "San Francisco"
would be considered CORRECT, even though it does not include "California".
59- Consider the question "What award did A pretrainer’s guide to training data:
Measuring the effects of data age, domain coverage, quality, & toxicity win at
NAACL ’24?", the gold target is "Outstanding Paper Award". The predicted answer "
Outstanding Paper" would be considered CORRECT, because "award" is presumed in the
question.
60- For the question "What is the height of Jason Wei in meters?", the gold target is
"1.73 m". The predicted answer "1.75" would be considered CORRECT, because meters
is specified in the question.
61- For the question "What is the name of Barack Obama’s wife?", the gold target is "
Michelle Obama". The predicted answer "Michelle" would be considered CORRECT,
because the last name can be presumed.
62- Do not punish for typos in people’s name if it’s clearly the same name.
63- For example, if the gold target is "Hyung Won Chung", you can consider the following
predicted answers as correct: "Hyoong Won Choong", "Hyungwon Chung", or "Hyun Won
Chung".
64
65
66Here is a new example. Simply reply with either CORRECT, INCORRECT, NOT ATTEMPTED. Don’t
apologize or correct yourself if there was a mistake; we are just trying to grade the
answer.
67‘‘‘
68Question: {question}
69Gold target: {target}
70Predicted answer: {predicted_answer}
71‘‘‘
72
73Grade the predicted answer of this new question as one of:
74A: CORRECT
75B: INCORRECT
76C: NOT_ATTEMPTED
77
78Just return the letters "A", "B", or "C", with no text around it.
18

=== PDF page 19 ===
Revealing Behavioral Plasticity in Large Language Models: A Token-Conditional Perspective
E.3. Details of RL Training Queries
To obtain the 10K factual and 10K mathematical query–answer pairs, we follow the RL data collection pipeline described in
(Yang et al., 2025), Section 4.2. Specifically, we first gather mathematical and factual problems from diverse sources. We
then filter queries that are both learnable and challenging by performing multiple response generations for each query (using
Qwen3-30B-A3B-2507-Thinking for math generation and Qwen3-30B-A3B-2507-Instruct for factual generation) prior to
RL training and grouping queries according to their empirical accuracy. The mathematical queries are primarily drawn from
those with moderate accuracy, whereas the factual set unavoidably includes some queries with low accuracy.
E.4. Format Penalty
For reasoning models, especially the Thinking models of Qwen3 series, the response pattern is strictly regulated. Specifically,
the response should consists of exactly one part of reasoning context, following with one part of summary context. It can be
characterized as follows:
1<think>
2REASONING CONTEXT
3<\think>
4
5SUMMARY CONTEXT
Sometimes the output of the model will violate such format (e.g., responses with multiple<think> or</think>), nevertheless,
the answer can be correct. For example, the output of the model can consist multiple </think> and corresponding summary,
while all of them are identical and contain the right answer. It’s evident that neither should we treat such responses as correct
responses (as their format is incorrect), nor should we treat them as incorrect responses (as they indeed provide correct
answer).
To handle such corner cases, we include format penalty in the reward calculation. Specifically, when the response possess a
wrong format, we will add a penalty 0< γ <1 to the reward. As a result, the responses with wrong format will still receive
a positive but smaller reward if they provide correct answers. Otherwise the responses will still receive a negative but larger
(in absolute value) reward. This can be formulated as follows. Note that we consistently use γ= 0.5 across the experiments.
Moreover, as such cases appear in only a tiny fraction of responses, the changes in γ have minimal impact on the overall
results.
r(s, a)←r(s, a)−γ·1[apossess incorrect format]
E.5. Training Details of ToCoRL
Since Qwen3-30B-A3B-2507-Thinking model adopt the MoE structure, we use Megatron (Shoeybi et al., 2019) for the
model’s parameter update. On the other hand, we use vLLM (Kwon et al., 2023) for the rollout stage due to its flexibility.
The learning rate is consistently set to 2e-6 across all the experiments. We set the batch size to 128, and since ToCoRL is
fully on-policy, additional mini batch size parameter is not required. In the rollout stage, we set group size to 16.
We set the maximum number of training steps to 1,000, during which we iteratively sample from the shuffled dataset for
training. However, we will terminate the training process if it has an early converge, in order to reduce computational
resource consumption.
F. Proofs
Theorem 4.1Given that for every state s, there exists an action a such that AπTC(s, a)̸= 0 , the policy ˜πTC(a|s) is
well-defined.
Proof. To prove that ˜πTC(a|s) is well-defined, we have to show that: 1. ∀s∼ S, a∼ A,˜π TC(a|s)≥0 . 2. ∀s∼
S,P
a∼A ˜πTC(a|s) = 1. We begin to prove the first.
19

