https://arxiv.org/html/2601.13562v1
S5.SS2  5.2 Architecture Variants of Transformer Block As part of the ablation study, we train multiple model variants under controlled settings. Unless otherwise stated, all models use the same base configuration adopted from VARC: embedding dimension 512, encoder depth 10, canvas size 64 × 64 64\times 64 , and 2 × 2 2\times 2 patching. Figure 4: Four architecture variants of our new transformer block for separating global controller from local workspace. Our core design hypothesis is that abstract reasoning benefits from an explicit role separation between a compact global controller (reasoning modality) and a large local workspace (grid state). Within a transformer block, there are multiple ways to impose such a separation. Figure 4 shows four candidate architectures: • Architecture a: No dense self-attention; controller attends globally; workspace attends only to controller. • Architecture b: No dense self-attention; controller attends globally; workspace attends to controller and a local neighborhood (self + 8 neighbors). • Architecture c: Dense self-attention followed by a structured pass; in the structured pass, controller attends globally; workspace attends only to controller. • Architecture d: Dense self-attention followed by a structured pass; in the structured pass, controller attends globally; workspace attends to controller and a local neighborhood (self + 8 neighbors). For compact notation, we denote an architecture by arch- r r , where arch ∈ { a , b , c , d } \in\{a,b,c,d\} and r r is the number of recurrent unroll steps (effective depth = = base depth × r \times r ). For example, d-1 denotes architecture d with r = 1 r=1 . Our offline training objective is the sum of the output-grid cross-entropy Long et al. (2015) and an optional mid-loss used for deep supervision Lee et al. (2015) under recurrence. Specifically, for recurrent models, we optionally project an intermediate hidden state to logits and apply a cross-entropy loss. In our implementation, models with r ∈ { 1 , 2 } r\in\{1,2\} are trained without mid-loss for stability and simplicity, while deeper recurrent settings use mid-loss. Figure 5: Ablation study and best models: training and evaluation accuracy curves across 100 training epochs for selected architectures of our new transformer block in pretraining. (a) and (b) compare the results of 5 basic architectures; while (c) and (d) show the results of 3 best models. We train these architectural variants under identical data and optimization settings to isolate the effect of role separation. Figure 5 shows training and evaluation curves of several representative architectures. Architecture a and b performed poorly on ARC tasks due to lack of dense self attention. Architecture c was comparable with the ViT baseline in training accuracy, but exhibits a smaller train-eval disparity under RE-ARC augmentation, suggesting a shift away from superficial distribution matching toward more rule-consistent generalization. Architecture d obtained the best training and evaluation accuracy. For r = 4 r=4 , we observed that training architecture d end-to-end did not always outperform architecture c, as shown in Figure 5 (c) and (d). Empirically, the best variant was obtained by staged training: we first trained architecture c 100 epochs and then enabled the structured neighborhood as in architecture d in the next 30 epochs, yielding the variant c-d-4 , our best model.
