
SECTION 3 Design Considerations 
 3 Design Considerations 3.1 Overheads of Hybrid Batching Combining prefill and decode requests in a single batch leads to tradeoffs between throughput and latencies (Figure 2(a) ). To maintain high throughput, larger chunk sizes are preferred at the cost of higher per-iteration latency, which directly corresponds to higher ITL. On the other hand, stringent ITL SLOs necessitate smaller chunk sizes, reducing effective GPU utilization and throughput. Our experiments show that a chunk size of 1K tokens achieves 20% better throughput on average, albeit with a 30% increase in ITL, compared to chunk size 512. This tradeoff requires careful orchestration of chunk sizes based on workload. 3.2 Overheads of Disaggregated Serving Disaggregated serving has been suggested as an alternative to hybrid batching, allowing for prefill and decode phases to execute on separate compute instances that are optimized for the respective phases. However, given a fixed set of resources, disaggregated serving exhibits a number of overheads compared to aggregated serving approaches. 3.2.1 KV Transfer In a disaggregated serving system, an incoming request is first routed to the prefill instance for prompt processing and initial KV cache population. The request and associated KV-cache data is then routed to decode instance for generating the output tokens. The overhead of KV cache transfer depends on several factors, such as the interconnect or network bandwidth, size of KV cache, the prefill/decode instance configurations, etc. Evaluating vLLM’s disaggregated serving on a node of 8 AMD Instinct TM MI300X GPUs (4P-4D), KV transfer is shown to have average overheads of 1.4x for throughput and 1.9x for Time-To-First-Token (TTFT). These overheads are typically larger for smaller prompts as there is less opportunity to overlap the transfer with the prompt computation. Note that in vLLM v1, the first token is calculated again in the decode instance after receiving the KV cache; hence, the KV transfer overhead impacts the generation of the first token rather than the second. (a) Compute-bound prefill phase exhibits direct correlation of performance with amount of compute resources (b) Memory-bandwidth bound decode achieves similar performance with 40-50% of compute (BS=Batchsize) Figure 3 : Resource requirements for inference phases. Y-axis represents performance degradation normalized to performance at 100% compute units (lower is better, 1=peak performance). 3.2.2 Memory Underutilization After the transfer, the KV cache data resides in the memory of decode instance during the longer decode phase, freeing up prefill instance memory. This creates an imbalance in the memory utilization of the instances, where decode instance(s) contain more data for longer time, whereas prefill instances’ memory capacity is underutilized. In a simple case where both prefill and decode are assigned the same number of similar GPUs, this imbalance implies up to 50% of memory capacity underutilization and consequently, in case of memory-capacity limited inference workload, up to 50% throughput cost, since half the memory capacity means half the number of requests executing in a single instance. 3.3 Phase Specific Resource Requirements The two phases of LLM inference exhibit distinct performance characteristics: the prefill phase that processes the input prompt is compute-bound, while the generation or decode phase is generally memory bandwidth bound. However, GPUs today have massive compute capabilities along with high memory capacity and bandwidth. Compute-bound workloads do not fully utilize memory-bandwidth, and decode phase does not need all the compute resources. RAPID-Serve proposes to concurrently execute prefill and decode in order to fully utilize the GPU’s capabilities. Figure 3 shows the impact of apportioning compute resources to prefill and decode. For this experiment, a matrix multiplication kernel corresponding to the up projection layer of LlaMA 3.1 70B model’s transformer layer was executed on AMD Instint TM MI300X with smaller input sizes corresponding to decode and larger input sizes corresponding to prefill. The kernels were then allocated specific compute resources using CU masking: a feature for fine-grained allocation of compute units (Section 4.2 ). Figure 3(a) shows that the performance of prefill workload decreases as the amount of compute resources decreases, confirming that prefill kernels are compute-bound. On the other hand, decode kernels (Figure 3(b) ) can achieve similar performance even when the compute resources are halved, showing that compute resources are underutilized during memory-bandwidth bound decode. Concurrent execution of these two phases presents a viable solution to better utilize GPU resources. 3.4 Memory Subsystem Interference Another form of interference when running multiple kernels concurrently on the same device is due to contention in the memory subsystem. While CU masking enables distinct compute resource allocation to concurrently running kernels, such allocation is not possible for the memory subsystem that includes caches, on-chip network, and memory channels and controllers. Contention for these resources causes memory interference. However, this interference is expected not to significantly impact the performance of compute-bound kernels. Our experiments based on attention kernels show that prefill kernels only exhibit a performance impact of up to 2% due to memory interference, which is quite modest and acceptable. The memory interference exhibited by decode kernels ranges from 2-5% on average. Repeating the same experiment with GEMM kernels, we observe larger memory interference for decode kernels. However, there is no available mechanism on AMD Instinct TM GPUs to partition the memory resources between concurrent kernels without virtualizing the GPUs. Hence, RAPID-Serve does not mitigate performance degradation due to memory subsystem. 

SECTION 4 RAPID-Serve Implementation 
 4 RAPID-Serve Implementation RAPID-Serve is designed to address the limitations of existing serving techniques. The implementation is based on vLLM v1 (v0.10.2rc3). This section details the implementation choices. 4.1 Overview The intuition behind the design of RAPID-Serve is to exploit the advantages of both hybrid chunking – concurrent execution of P/D for high resource utilization – and disaggregated serving – decoupling of the two phases to meet latency SLOs – on the same device(s). Our design goals are as follows: 1. Maintain high GPU utilization for compute and memory 2. Minimize gaps in GPU execution and maintain high concurrency for prefill and decode 3. Meet latency SLOs for both prefill and decode 4. Maintain the advantages of hybrid chunking and disaggregated serving while mitigating their overheads As described in Section 3.1 , while hybrid batching provides high throughput, its main disadvantage is the coupling of decode and prefill requests by combining both in a single batch, meaning that prefill and decode computation is done in a lockstep, causing latencies to exceed strict SLOs (Figure 2(a) ). RAPID-Serve addresses this limitation by executing prefill and decode phases in parallel but not combining them in a single batch. This means that prefill and decode are executed in separate processes and GPU kernels, but the kernels overlap their execution. RAPID-Serve removes the lockstep execution of hybrid batching while still providing the throughput advantage (Figure 2(c) ). RAPID-Serve inherently addresses the overhead of KV cache transfer associated with disaggregated serving (Section 3.2.1 ) by executing prefill and decode concurrently on the same device (design goal #1) and sharing KV cache between them, thus avoiding any inter-device KV cache transfers. Moreover, as KV cache resides on the same device as prefill and decode, there is no imbalance in memory capacity utilization unlike disaggregated serving (Figure 2 ). 4.2 CU Masking RAPID-Serve’s design leverages a hardware mechanism exposed by AMD Instinct TM GPUs called CU masking, which allows kernel execution to be restricted to a subset of compute units. When CU masking is enabled, there is a bit mask associated with each command queue with each bit corresponding to a specific CU. When a kernel is enqueued on a CU-masked command queue, its workgroups are only executed on the specific CUs. This feature is transparent to the application: no kernel code changes are required, and the masked-out CUs are simply invisible to the workload. Importantly, CU masking provides spatial control over GPU compute resources and is orthogonal to other optimization mechanisms such as kernel priority or GPU virtualization. 4.3 Multiprocessing vs. Multithreading While LLM inference is generally a GPU-bound task, enabling GPU concurrency also requires that the host CPU tasks also run in parallel. The CPU is responsible for tasks such as handling incoming requests and outgoing responses, scheduling requests for GPU processing, post-processing the outputs and managing the KV cache. Serialization in CPU work can cause gaps in GPU execution and limit concurrency (Figure 6(a) ). As the use of the Global Interpreter Lock (GIL) in Python limits concurrent execution of multiple threads, RAPID-Serve takes a multiprocessing approach where prefill and decode are executed by different processes to allow true concurrent execution of CPU tasks and avoid interference from different threads (design goal #2). Figure 4 : Flow of a single request 4.4 Request Flow Figure 4 shows the execution flow of a single request as it arrives in the RAPID-Serve engine. Each request is directed simultaneously to both prefill and decode processes. In the decode process, the request is added first to the "waiting queue," after which it is allocated the required KV cache blocks. The number of blocks to allocate for prompt can be determined by the input context length. The IDs of the allocated blocks are then passed to the prefill instance. At this point in the prefill process, the request moves from "pending_kv queue" to "waiting_prefill queue." This request is serviced by the prefill instance. After the prompt is processed and the KV cache populated, the decode process is notified. Note that there is no KV cache transfer, just a notification from prefill process to decode process. As the decode process receives this notification, it moves the request to "prefill_finished" queue and subsequently adds it to the running decode batch to start generating the output tokens. This flow is fully asynchronous as there are no locks or serialization between the two processes. As there are multiple requests in the system at any one point in time, prefill process does not need to pause its execution of ongoing requests to wait for notifications from decode process and vice versa. 4.5 Server Components Figure 5 : Main components of RAPID-Serve The RAPID-Serve engine has two concurrent processes: prefill and decode. The model weights and KV cache are shared by both processes through Inter Process Communication (IPC) handles. The processes communicate through shared storage to send notifications of certain events and other information. Figure 5 presents the main components of RAPID-Serve design and the following sections present the details of these components. 4.5.1 KV Cache Manager The KV cache manager for RAPID-Serve is based on the vLLM KV cache manager that supports PagedAttention [ 10 ] to efficiently manage KV cache "block" allocation per request. It is also responsible for releasing the unused blocks as the request life-cycle ends or the request is preempted. In RAPID-Serve, only the decode process has this component. The reason is to avoid having both processes manage the KV cache simultaneously, which would require all KV cache operations to be done inside critical sections managed by locks, introducing additional serialization and dependencies between the two processes and violating design goal #2. Hence, only the decode instance is responsible for managing the KV cache, because while the number of KV-cache blocks required for the prompt can be calculated based on the input context length, this calculation is not possible for the generated text (decode) as the number of output tokens are not known beforehand. As depicted in Figure 4 , the decode process allocates the KV cache blocks for prompt and notifies prefill, after which prefill process can start execution, avoiding the use of locks. 4.5.2 Scheduler (a) Naive scheduling and resource allocation (b) Async_scheduling (c) Adaptive Resource Allocation (CPU work not shown) Figure 6 : Scheduling and Resource Allocation Strategies employed in RAPID-Serve The RAPID-Serve schedulers (both prefill and decode) follow a first-come-first-serve (FCFS) policy (i.e., requests are prioritized in the order of the arrival). To increase GPU utilization and reduce gaps due to scheduling (Figure 6(a) ), we enable async_scheduling (Figure 6(b) ). This technique was introduced in Nanoflow [ 19 ] where the scheduler runs one step ahead of the GPU execution, considering the next token as a placeholder. If the request ends in the current step, an additional token would be generated in the next step since the async_scheduler does not know that the request had ended at the time of scheduling (while the current step was still in flight). However, this is not a significant overhead as the decode requests are batched and the impact of one extra token per request is not significant. Async_scheduling significantly decreases CPU time, specifically for the decode instance as the CPU time in decode is relatively higher because of lower GPU execution time. Async_scheduling is also enabled for prefill and does not have the overhead of an additional generated token, as it is assumed that prefill request will finish in one step (no prefill chunking). Overall, async_scheduling reduces the gaps in GPU execution and helps maintain high resource utilization. 4.5.3 Adaptive Resource Manager The Adaptive Resource Manager is responsible for allocating compute resources based on current worklaod and SLOs. As described earlier, RAPID-Serve uses CU masking to allocate distinct resources to prefill and decode. However, when the number of decode requests is low, situations may arise when decode might finish early while prefill is still running and the CUs assigned to decode would remain unused during the current prefill iteration (Figure 6(b) ). As RAPID-Serve makes use of HIP Graphs for reducing the launch overhead of GPU kernels, it is not possible to change the command queue or its associated CU mask once the graph has been launched. Note that the opposite situation (i.e., prefill iteration ending earlier than decode) is not much of a concern since decode iteration time is much lower than prefill’s, and all CUs can be assigned to decode on the next step. To avoid this situation, the Adaptive Resource Manager overallocates the compute units and assigns 100% of compute resources to both prefill and decode when decode workload is lower. The prefill and decode kernels end up competing for resources and have to rely on the GPU’s hardware scheduler for their workgroups to be scheduled on any available compute unit. This scheme maximizes GPU utilization as the hardware scheduler can allocate any workgroup on any CU without any restriction. In case the decode ends while prefill iteration is still ongoing, the prefill workgroups will be assigned to all the CUs, mitigating the gap as shown in Figure 6(c) . Figure 7 : Decode latency at varying batchsizes with different resource allocation schemes. DXX=XX% of CUs allocated to decode, PYY=YY% of CUs allocated to prefill At higher request rates or heavier workload, decode requests fail to meet SLOs under the overallocation scheme. This is because the competition between prefill and decode for the same resources introduces inter-stream interference as measured in Figure 7 . The configuration P100-D100 (100% to prefill, 100% to decode) represents the overallocation scenario, which starts exceeding the SLO for larger decode batch sizes. It is also shown that at higher batch sizes, allocating distinct compute resources to prefill and decode eliminates inter-stream interference, allowing decode to meet the SLOs. Based on the observations in Figure 7 , the Adaptive Resource Scheduler switches to distinct CU allocation schemes based on the decode workload and stringent ITL SLO. Based on offline profiles, the minimum number of compute units required for different decode batch sizes to meet the SLO are determined. At runtime, the manager allocates only enough CUs to decode as required to meet the SLO and to avoid impacting prefill performance more than needed as compute-bound prefill will get the remaining CUs and its performance will be impacted accordingly. As the decode workload increases/decreases, the resource manager is able to adjust the number of resources to maintain high throughput and CU utilization while meeting SLOs. 

SECTION 5 Evaluation 
 5 Evaluation 5.1 Experiment Setup 5.2 Throughput and Goodput 5.3 Tail Latencies 5.4 Resource Utilization 

