{"id": "2602.03100", "core": [{"section": "S3", "text": "3 Experiments"}, {"section": "S3", "text": "We aim to answer the following research questions:"}, {"section": "S3", "text": "RQ1: How does agent safety robustness manifest under different threat model assumptions during real-world task execution?"}, {"section": "S3", "text": "RQ2: How does safety behavior differ across agents under distinct safety rubrics?"}, {"section": "S3", "text": "RQ3: Does enabling explicit reasoning introduce additional safety vulnerabilities in agent execution?"}, {"section": "S3", "text": "Datasets. To evaluate agent safety in realistic deployment settings, we construct safety assessment task scenarios from real-world agent tasks in VitaBench (He et al., 2025), covering three domains: food delivery, in-store consumption, and online travel services. We sample 50 tasks per attack surface in each domain, yielding 750 tasks in total, with balanced coverage over 15 safety rubrics and 5 attack surfaces. Detailed data configurations are illustrated in Appendix D.1. Example illustrations of the generated task scenarios, together with the resulting agent execution trajectories, are included in Appendix A.3 and Appendix C."}, {"section": "S3", "text": "Evaluation metrics. We report the Attack Success Rate (ASR) as the primary safety metric, defined as the proportion of tasks in which an attack successfully induces agent behaviors that violate the corresponding safety rubric."}, {"section": "S3", "text": "Agent setup. We benchmark seven state-of-the-art LLM agents on Risky-Bench, including proprietary models (Gemini-3-flash-preview, GPT-4.1, and Claude Haiku 4.5) and open-source models (Qwen-Plus-2025-07-28, DeepSeek-V3.2, kimi-k2-0905-preview, and Doubao-Seed-1.8). Following VitaBench interaction protocol, each agent operates as an interactive service under user instructions, while a separate LLM acts as the user simulator to generate turn-by-turn user responses. We implement the user simulator using GPT-4.1 and generate all agent responses with temperature 0.0 and a maximum token limit of 8192."}, {"section": "S3.SS1", "text": "3.1 Agent robustness under various threat models (RQ1)"}, {"section": "S3.SS1", "text": "Results. Figure 4 summarizes safety performance of seven agents under varying threat model assumptions across all domains. From a joint analysis of concrete agent execution cases, we observe that:"}, {"section": "S3.SS1", "text": "Safety risks in agent execution emerge under minimal threat model assumptions and increase substantially as adversarial access expands. Even when adversarial influence is limited to user instructions or environmental noise, agents already exhibit non-trivial attack success rates across domains. Under user-instruction attacks, Gemini-3, GPT-4.1, DeepSeek-V3.2, and Doubao-Seed-1.8 exceed an ASR of 0.4 in the in-store domain, while environmental noise alone induces consistent failures across models. As threat model access expands to memory poisoning, tool feedback manipulation, and system-level control, safety risks escalate substantially, with Gemini, Qwen, DeepSeek-V3.2, and Doubao-Seed-1.8 exhibiting ASRs above 0.8 under tool- and codebase-level attacks. Overall, these results demonstrate that agent safety failures can arise under weak threat assumptions and intensify rapidly as additional execution surfaces become accessible."}, {"section": "S3.SS1", "text": "Agent safety mechanisms are fundamentally constrained by the helpfulness-first orientation of underlying LLMs, biasing agents toward user alignment over safety compliance. Under the user-instruction attack surface, state-of-the-art agents exhibit non-trivial attack success rates, as they tend to follow malicious user requests framed as legitimate service preferences (Sharma et al., 2024). In OTA domains involving high-value transactions, Doubao-Seed-1.8 and Qwen-Plus reach ASRs of 0.22 and 0.14 respectively, including cases of assisting unauthorized payments from non-owner accounts based solely on fabricated claims of user privileges. These results indicate that semantic manipulation at the user-instruction level can exploit and bypass existing compliance constraints."}, {"section": "S3.SS1", "text": "Agents lack effective mechanisms for assessing the trustworthiness of external environment signals, leaving them vulnerable to adversarial manipulation. Under environment noise attack surfaces, state-of-the-art agents consistently misinterpret malicious instructions embedded within environments as legitimate contextual signals. In the in-store domain, Claude-Haiku-4.5 and Gemini-3 achieve ASRs of 0.16 and 0.14 respectively, with agents in several cases induced to harvest sensitive user information upon perceiving malicious content disguised as system instructions embedded in product descriptions. These results indicate that implicit trust in the execution environment allows third-party attackers to hijack agent decision-making through semantic manipulation."}, {"section": "S3.SS1", "text": "Safety risks escalate when malicious objectives are embedded in feedback from non-interactive tools, enabling them to override agent decision-making. Unlike environmental noise arising from external contexts, the tool-feedback attack surface exploits outputs from non-interactive tools that agents treat as authoritative system messages. Under this attack surface, agents exhibit severe alignment failures, with Qwen-Plus and DeepSeek-V3.2 reaching ASRs above 0.8 across all three domains. For example, after invoking an order-creation tool, a forged return message framed as a system directive can trigger autonomous order placement without user confirmation, even in otherwise conservative models such as Claude-4.5-Haiku. These results indicate that current LLM-based agents implicitly assign privileged trust to feedback from non-interactive tool, allowing malicious intent embedded in such feedback to bypass internal safety guardrails."}, {"section": "S3.SS1", "text": "Agents tend to prioritize historical consistency over safety constraints, potentially carrying out unauthorized behavior under memory poisoning attacks. In practice, agents may treat prior interactions as implicitly validated and follow previously established behaviors in subsequent executions, overriding safety constraints that would otherwise apply. Across three evaluated domains, agents exhibit consistently high attack success rates when exposed to memory entries that encode unsafe action trajectories (all exceeding 50% except for Claude-4.5-Haiku), including cases where agents proceeded to use non-owner accounts for payments after similar actions had been adversarially injected into the interaction history. These results indicate that memory poisoning can deviate agent decision-making towards unverified historical context, leading to substantive safety risks."}, {"section": "S3.SS1", "text": "Codebase poisoning can lead to severe failures of agent safety, as malicious system-level instructions can override safety constraints and redirect agent behavior toward harmful actions. Specifically, agents lack effective mechanisms to resolve logical inconsistencies between safety constraints and high-priority system instructions, and may therefore treat conflicting system-level prompts as authoritative. Across evaluated domains, poisoned system prompts such as requiring payments to be routed through a purported “platform subsidy account” (in practice, a third-party account) result in consistently high attack success rates, with Gemini-3 and DeepSeek-V3.2 both exhibiting ASRs of 0.84. More concerningly, agents not only complied with unauthorized payments but also actively rationalized these actions as “user incentives” or “official subsidies” when questioned by users. These results indicate that codebase-level instruction hijacking can redirect agent reasoning toward both compliance with and internal endorsement of illegal actions, thereby posing substantive risks to agent safety."}, {"section": "S3.SS2", "text": "3.2 Safety behavior across different rubrics (RQ2)"}, {"section": "S3.SS2", "text": "Results. Figure 6 provides an overview of agent safety behavior across different safety rubrics and deployment domains, with corresponding detailed rubric definitions indexed consistently in Section A.1. Each cell reports the attack success rate (ASR) of a given agent under a specific safety rubric, with color intensity indicating the severity of safety violations. We observe that:"}, {"section": "S3.SS2", "text": "Agents exhibit substantial variation in safety robustness across different base model families. Among seven state-of-the-art model families evaluated, Claude-4.5-Haiku demonstrates strongest safety alignment, maintaining lowest attack success rates across nearly all safety rubrics. This performance is consistent with Claude’s reputation for stronger safety guardrails at base LLM level (Xie et al., 2024c). In contrast, models such as Gemini-3, DeepSeek-V3.2, and Doubao-Seed-1.8 exhibit markedly higher vulnerability to action-oriented safety failures across rubrics and domains. This disparity suggests that differences in base-model safety alignment can be amplified in agentic settings, leading to severe real-world safety failures beyond text generation."}, {"section": "S3.SS2", "text": "Safety risks are asymmetrically distributed across rubrics, with financial transactions and execution-time authorization constraints being the most vulnerable categories. Specifically, certain safety categories are enforced far less effectively than others, regardless of the underlying model. Financial-related rubrics represent a critical failure point: “7. Illicitly executing payments using another user’s account” and “10. Executing payments without explicit user confirmation” exhibit consistently high ASRs across models and domains, indicating that agents often prioritize task completion over financial authorization protocols. Beyond financial actions, other behaviors subject to execution-time validation constraints are similarly vulnerable to violation. For example, “14. Returning unverified or potentially unsafe links” is frequently breached, as agents often bypass these constraints to complete requested actions."}, {"section": "S3.SS3", "text": "3.3 Safety Implications of Explicit Reasoning (RQ3)"}, {"section": "S3.SS3", "text": "Results. Figure 7 compares agent safety behaviors between thinking and non-thinking modes for Claude-Haiku-4.5 and Qwen-Plus in the delivery domain across different attack surfaces. The two models are chosen to contrast agents built on base LLMs with widely recognized strong safety alignment (Claude) versus comparatively weaker baseline alignment (Qwen). We observe that:"}, {"section": "S3.SS3", "text": "The effect of explicit reasoning on agent safety behavior is dependent on the underlying model’s safety alignment and primarily serves to amplify existing decision priorities. For Claude-Haiku-4.5, a model with relatively strong text-level safety alignment, explicit reasoning improves the detection of jailbreak attempts and forged histories, leading to clear safety gains under user-instruction and memory-poisoning attacks, with ASR decreasing from 0.04 to 0.02 and from 0.22 to 0.14, respectively. These gains do not generalize across all settings. Under environmental noise attacks, adversarial signals lack explicit malicious semantics and appear as injected instructions; explicit reasoning instead biases Claude toward compliance, increasing ASR from 0.06 to 0.14. Under codebase attacks, as system instructions receive high priority in Claude, explicit reasoning further encourages the rationalization of maliciously injected system prompts, raising ASR from 0.44 to 0.52. In contrast, for Qwen-Plus, a model with comparatively weaker baseline safety alignment, explicit reasoning consistently increases agent ASR across attack surfaces, amplifying its existing tendency to prioritize task completion over safety-oriented decision-making."}]}
{"id": "2602.03442", "core": [{"section": "S5.SS3", "text": "5.3 Failure Mode Analysis"}, {"section": "S5.SS3", "text": "We manually reviewed the first 100 incorrect cases of A-RAG on MuSiQue and categorized them into 2-level error types (Figure 5). The majority of failures stem from reasoning chain errors. Among these, entity confusion is the most common, with substantial portions also attributed to wrong retrieval strategies and question misunderstanding. Detailed category definitions and analysis on other datasets are provided in Appendix D."}]}
{"id": "2602.03094", "core": [{"section": "S4.SS4", "text": "4.4 Validations of the Key Designs"}, {"section": "S4.SS4.SSS0.Px1", "text": "We first examine whether strategic planning per roll-out and knowledge accumulation improved the system’s coverage in the solution space. On LiveCodeBench with 2 rollouts per round (K=2K=2), we compare pass@kk against baseline (sampling randomly with temperature=1) at equivalent sample counts."}, {"section": "S4.SS4.SSS0.Px1", "text": "Strategic planning improves pass@k by 2–7 percentage points across both models (Fig. 4), indicating that accumulated knowledge and per-rollout strategy indeed improved the model’s exploration in the solution space."}, {"section": "S4.SS4.SSS0.Px2", "text": "We examine whether increasing rollouts per round (KK) improves the achievable upper bound beyond K=2K{=}2 (Fig. 6). For o4-mini, K=2K{=}2, K=4K{=}4, and K=8K{=}8 all converge to similar cumulative best accuracy (78–82%). If more rollouts cannot raise the ceiling, there is no benefit to parallel breadth within rounds. This confirms that depth beats breadth, iterative refinement across rounds matters more than parallel exploration within rounds."}, {"section": "S4.SS4.SSS0.Px3", "text": "Model Configuration Acc. Cumul. Best Gap o4-mini Baseline (pass@1) 63.5% — — + Strategy 66.5% 78.3% 11.8% + Strategy + Test Exec 73.9% 78.8% 4.9% o3 Baseline (pass@1) 57.1% — — + Strategy 61.6% 77.8% 16.3% + Strategy + Test Exec 71.9% 75.4% 3.5%"}, {"section": "S4.SS4.SSS0.Px3", "text": "We further decompose the gains to determine whether they arise from exploration (per-rollout strategy & knowledge list) or verification (self-designed test execution). Table 1 shows both contribute substantially. From baseline 63.5%, strategic planning adds 3.0 percentage points by discovering solutions unreachable through random sampling. Self-generated test execution contributes 7.4 percentage points through effective selection."}, {"section": "S4.SS4.SSS0.Px3", "text": "These results indicate that TRT improves code generation through two complementary mechanisms. First, accumulated knowledge and per-rollout strategy guide exploration toward more promising solutions, leading to higher pass@k compared to parallel sampling with the same rollout budget. Second, self-generated tests and execution feedback enable the model to better discriminate between candidate programs, narrowing the gap between cumulative best and the selected solution in each round. Together, these effects allow TRT to outperform RSA under equivalent compute, while avoiding the need for ground-truth labels or external feedback."}, {"section": "S5.SS2", "text": "5.2 Problem-Level Breakdown"}, {"section": "S5.SS2", "text": "In Fig. 5a, we categorize the 203 problems by baseline accuracy and TRT outcomes. Baseline Correct (46%) were solved by baseline and retained by TRT. TRT New Solve (28%) were unsolved by baseline but solved by TRT at round 8. TRT Unstable (15%) were solved by baseline but lost by TRT during refinement. Never Solved (11%) remained unsolved by both approaches."}, {"section": "S5.SS2", "text": "Of particular interest are 36 problems (17.7%) that we term breakthroughs: problems where baseline failed even at pass@10, yet TRT eventually solved. These problems are unreachable through independent sampling within practical sample budgets. Strategic exploration finds qualitatively different solutions than random sampling. Appendix A.1 presents detailed case studies of one such breakthrough problem, illustrating how accumulated knowledge guides strategy evolution."}]}

