https://arxiv.org/html/2602.17155v1
Powering Up Zeroth-Order Training via Subspace Gradient Orthogonalization
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related Work
3 Rethinking ZO Optimization: From Full Space to A Projected Subspace View
4 ZO-Muon: Boosting Subspace ZO via Gradient Orthogonalization
5 Experiments
5.1 Experiment setups
5.2 Experiment results
6 Conclusion
References
A Intrinsic Rank Measurement
B Ineffectiveness of Full Space Gradient Orthogonalization
C ZO-Muon Algorithm
D Proof of Proposition
E Hyperparameter Study on NqN_{q} in ZO-Muon
F Detailed Experiment Setups
Models and datasets.
Implementation details.
Hyperparameters.
Computing resources.
G Additional Experiment Results
Loss curves of LLM fine-tuning.
Gemma2-2B results.
Projection matrix resampling interval
Projection matrix sampling strategies.
SVD vs. NS in ZO-Muon.
ZO-Muon does not rely on large batch sizes.
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17155v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026
Powering Up Zeroth-Order Training via Subspace Gradient Orthogonalization
Yicheng Lang
Affiliation: Michigan State University
Changsheng Wang
Affiliation: Michigan State University
Yihua Zhang
Affiliation: Michigan State University
Mingyi Hong
Affiliation: University of Minnesota
Zheng Zhang
Affiliation: University of California, Santa Barbara
Wotao Yin
Affiliation: DAMO
Academy, Alibaba Group US
Sijia Liu
Affiliation: Michigan State University
Affiliation: IBM Research, USA
Abstract
Zeroth-order (ZO) optimization provides a gradient-free alternative to first-order (FO) methods by estimating gradients via finite differences of function evaluations, and has recently emerged as a memory-efficient paradigm for fine-tuning large-scale models by avoiding backpropagation.
However, ZO optimization
has a fundamental tension between accuracy and query efficiency.
In this work, we show that ZO optimization can be substantially improved by unifying two complementary principles: (i) a projection-based subspace view that reduces gradient estimation variance by exploiting the intrinsic low-rank structure of model updates, and (ii) Muon-style spectral optimization that applies gradient orthogonalization to extract informative spectral structure from noisy ZO gradients. These findings form a unified framework of subspace gradient orthogonalization, which we instantiate in a new method, ZO-Muon, admitting a natural interpretation as a low-rank Muon optimizer in the ZO setting.
Extensive experiments on large language models (LLMs) and vision transformers (ViTs) demonstrate that ZO-Muon significantly accelerates convergence and achieves a win–win improvement in accuracy and query/runtime efficiency. Notably, compared to the popular MeZO baseline, ZO-Muon requires only 24.7% of the queries to reach the same SST-2 performance for LLM fine-tuning, and improves accuracy by 25.1% on ViT-B fine-tuning on CIFAR-100.
Code is available at https://github.com/OPTML-Group/ZO-Muon.
A Preprint
1 Introduction
Training deep models such as large language models (LLMs) (Achiam et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2022a; Touvron et al., 2023) relies on backpropagation (BP) to compute first-order (FO) gradients for optimization (Amari, 1993; Kingma, 2014). However, as model sizes scale, the GPU memory cost of BP grows substantially (Chen et al., 2025b). This motivates a fundamental question with practical impact: Can deep models be trained in a gradient-free manner without relying on BP?
Toward this end, zeroth-order (ZO) optimization (Liu et al., 2020a; Duchi et al., 2015; Nesterov and Spokoiny, 2017) offers a theoretically grounded alternative to FO optimization by estimating gradients via finite differences of function values using only forward passes of the model, thereby substantially reducing the memory footprint during training (Malladi et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2024; Tan et al., 2025b; Liu et al., 2025b).
Although ZO optimization also arises in black-box or gray-box application settings (Chen et al., 2017; Ilyas et al., 2018; Zhao et al., 2019; Chen et al., 2023) (where FO gradients are infeasible or inaccessible), memory-efficient fine-tuning of large models has recently become one of its most impactful and arguably primary applications, as first proposed in (Malladi et al., 2023) and a focus of this work.
(a) LLM fine-tuning: OPT-1.3B on RTE
(b) ViT fine-tuning: ViT-B on CIFAR-10 (left) & 100 (right)
Figure 1:
ZO-Muon achieves faster convergence and better fine-tuning accuracy than the SOTA ZO baselines MeZO (Malladi et al., 2023) and LOZO (Chen et al., 2025a) against runtime. (a) OPT-1.3B fine-tuned on the RTE task: training loss (left) and test accuracy (right) versus runtime, with the cumulative query count indicated by the color bar in the right subplot.
(b) ViT-B fine-tuned on CIFAR-10 (left) and CIFAR-100 (right), shown in the same format as in (a, right).
(a) Efficiency comparison for OPT-1.3B fine-tuned on SST-2
(b) Efficiency comparison for ViT-B fine-tuned on CIFAR-10
Figure 2:
ZO-Muon yields lower runtime and fewer function queries than all baselines (under comparable GPU memory usage), when reaching the target fine-tuning accuracies: (a) 0.900.90 on SST-2 and (b) 0.930.93 on CIFAR-10. Baselines include MeZO (Malladi et al., 2023), SparseMeZO (S-MeZO) (Liu et al., 2025b), HiZOO (Zhao et al., 2025b), and LOZO (Chen et al., 2025a).
Despite the promise of ZO optimization, achieving convergence and accuracy comparable to FO optimization remains highly nontrivial. A key challenge of ZO optimization is the high variance of query-based gradient estimation, which becomes increasingly severe as the problem dimension grows (Duchi et al., 2015; Nesterov and Spokoiny, 2017; Liu et al., 2018a; Liu et al., 2018b; Chen et al., 2023).
Therefore, to reduce the variance of ZO gradient estimation, existing work has focused on designing improved gradient estimators. Examples include preconditioning the estimator with Hessian information (Zhao et al., 2025a; Zhao et al., 2025b), optimizing per
