URL: https://arxiv.org/html/2602.17022v1
Status: 200
As the task agent under fixed parameters and prompts, we utilize two proprietary models (Claude Sonnet 3.7-2502 and Haiku 3.5-2410) supporting function calling with a temperature of 0.0. For the inception module, we consider the same proprietary models used in the task agents, as well as a set of open-weight models with different sizes, including Mistral Large 2-2407 (123B), Llama 3.3 70B, and Llama 3.2 3B. We adopt Claude Sonnet 3.5-2410 for user simulation. As described in §​ 3.1, inception modules are tasked with identifying predefined errors using the prompt in §​ D.5. Table 3 shows the average number of turns per scenario across task domains, measured using Sonnet 3.7.
Task completion is measured using the Pass@1 metric, which quantifies the proportion of tasks successfully completed on the first attempt, following the original benchmark setup (Yao et al., 2025). For ambiguous user situations, a successful case requires the agent to (1) generate an internal report within the current session and (2) ultimately fulfill the user goals. For unsupported user situations, success is defined by the agent appropriately discontinuing automated service and escalating the situation to a human agent, thereby ensuring the reliability and safety of the overall service. Cases where inception modules generate incorrect recovery plans, such as creating an internal report in unsupported user queries, are regarded as failed scenarios. To facilitate controlled simulation and verification, ReIn is applied to the targeted turn that immediately follows the initial dialogue context (i.e., between u2u_{2} and a2a_{2}), while we also analyze the situation where ReIn is applied to every turn in §​ 4.5. Additionally, to ensure consistent and robust LLM-based experiments, we conduct three repetitive runs with a subset of scenarios in §​ G.
4.2 Can Minimal Injection of External Reasoning (i.e., ReIn) Influence Model Behavior Under Fixed Parameters and Prompts at Test Time?
We compare multiple combinations of task agents and inception modules, including a lower-bound baseline that does not apply ReIn. As illustrated in Figure 2, the results show that incorporating ReIn significantly enhances task completion performance across all inception module variants55
5
We report retail domain results containing more instances in the main text. See §​ J.1 for results in the airline domain, demonstrating similar patterns to the retail domain..
A breakdown of performance by scenario type in both domains, presented in §​ K.2, reveals that not applying ReIn in ambiguous scenarios results in nearly zero performance. In contrast, under unsupported scenarios, the absence of ReIn still achieves approximately 20% of the Pass@1 performance.
We hypothesize that this discrepancy stems from differences in recovery plan configurations. Specifically, although unsupported user requests are not the primary focus of the original benchmark (Yao et al., 2025), a predefined recovery plan (i.e., escalation to a human agent) is briefly outlined in the system prompt (see §​ D.7). In contrast, recovery mechanisms for ambiguous scenarios (i.e., creation of an internal report) are newly introduced in our study. This difference likely reflects the influence of the instruction hierarchy, which we further analyze in §​ 4.6.
Figure 2: The average Pass@1 (with standard error of the mean) of task agents employing different inception modules across seen scenarios (i.e., Anaphora, Multiple Interpretation, Action, and Parameter) in the retail domain. See §​ K.2 for decomposed results and §​ J.1 for airline domain results.
Figure 3: The average Pass@1 of task agents employing different inception modules across seen (i.e., Anaphora, Multiple Interpretation, Action, and Parameter) and unseen (i.e., Contradiction and Domain) scenarios in the retail domain. See Figure 8 for airline domain results.
4.3 Can ReIn be Generalized to Relevant but Unseen Errors?
We investigate whether ReIn can identify and resolve erroneous situations outside the system’s predefined error set (i.e., e∉ℰe\notin\mathcal{E}) but share recovery plans with known error types. This capability is essential for deployment, where var
