A Picture of Agentic Search
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract.
1 Introduction
2 Related Work
3 Terminology
4 Dataset Construction
4.1 Properties
4.2 Methodology
5 Dataset
5.1 Format
5.2 Experimental Setup & Configurations
6 Data analysis & Discussion
6.1 Trace Statistics, Workloads & Query Length
6.2 Human vs. Agentic Query Reformulations
6.3 Within-Trace Query Evolutions
7 Potential Impact
8 Challenges & Limitations
9 Ethics Statement
10 Conclusions & Future Work
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17518v1 [cs.IR] 19 Feb 2026
A Picture of Agentic Search
DOI: XXXXXXX.XXXXXXXConference: SIGIR; June 03–05, 2018; Woodstock, NYCCS: Information systems Information retrieval
Francesca Pezzuti
email: francesca.pezzuti@phd.unipi.it
Affiliation: University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
,
Ophir Frieder
email: ophir@ir.cs.georgetown.edu
Affiliation: Georgetown University, Washington, DC, USA
,
Fabrizio Silvestri
email: fsilvestri@diag.uniroma1.it
Affiliation: Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy
,
Sean MacAvaney
email: sean.macavaney@glasgow.ac.uk
Affiliation: University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK
and
Nicola Tonellotto
email: nicola.tonellotto@unipi.it
Affiliation: University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
2018
Abstract.
With automated systems increasingly issuing search queries alongside humans, Information Retrieval (IR) faces a major shift. Yet IR remains human-centred, with systems, evaluation metrics, user models, and datasets designed around human queries and behaviours. Consequently, IR operates under assumptions that no longer hold in practice, with changes to workload volumes, predictability, and querying behaviours.
This misalignment affects system performance and optimisation: caching may lose effectiveness, query pre-processing may add overhead without improving results, and standard metrics may mismeasure satisfaction.
Without adaptation, retrieval models risk satisfying neither humans, nor the emerging user segment of agents. However, datasets capturing agent search behaviour are lacking, which is a critical gap given IR’s historical reliance on data-driven evaluation and optimisation. We develop a methodology for collecting all the data produced and consumed by agentic retrieval-augmented systems when answering queries, and we release the Agentic Search Queryset (ASQ) dataset. ASQ contains reasoning-induced queries, retrieved documents, and thoughts for queries in HotpotQA, Researchy Questions, and MS MARCO, for 3 diverse agents and 2 retrieval pipelines. The accompanying toolkit enables ASQ to be extended to new agents, retrievers, and datasets.
fpezzuti/ASQ
AgenticSearchQueryset/ASQ
Keywords: Agentic Search, Information Retrieval, Evaluation Dataset
1. Introduction
Information Retrieval (IR) has traditionally focused on optimising search systems for human users through rigorous, data-driven evaluation. In addition to the classic ad hoc retrieval task, considerable attention focused on session-level search behaviours. In session-level search, systems model users’ behaviour across a sequence of queries, often representing their attempts to fully address an information need (Jansen et al., 2000) or solve tasks (Shah et al., 2023). Studies into session-level search yielded insights that shaped the design and implementation of today’s search engines, including system optimisation (Zuo et al., 2022), personalisation (Zhang and Liu, 2025; MacAvaney et al., 2022), and query suggestion (Bacciu et al., 2024). Behavioural data were collected from human users, including query logs (Pass et al., 2006; Zhang and Moffat, 2006) and controlled examples from shared tasks (Kanoulas et al., 2010; Dalton et al., 2020; Aliannejadi et al., 2023).
A major shift is happening. Increasingly, search engine queries are provided by automated systems. While a human user’s query (or prompt) still usually initiates the process, Large Language Models (LLMs) are increasingly used to decompose the user’s request and issue multiple queries to help fulfil it.
This was initially popularised by the Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) paradigm (Gao et al., 2023; Lewis et al., 2020), which integrates IR modules into a cascade architecture where a retriever collects query-relevant documents from a document collection, and feeds them to the LLM generator that produces a final direct response.
This paradigm has since developed in terms of the technical search mechanism (from pre-generation retrieval (Lewis et al., 2020) to general-purpose tool use (Yao et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2025)) and its applications (from simple question decomposition (Rosset et al., 2025) to deep research (Nakano et al., 2021)). These efforts are broadly referred to as agentic (Zhang et al., 2024), where LLMs act as “agents” capable of taking actions autonomously to complete a task. Specifically, we focus on agentic RAG systems (or reasoning-augmented search agents) like Search-R1 (Jin et al., 2025) and AutoRefine (Shi et al., 2025), which extend RAG through an iterative approach to overcome its limitations in answering questions requiring multi-hop retrieval and reasoning (Lewis et al., 2020; Plaat et al., 2025).
With agents issuing queries alongside humans (Zhai, 2025; Koneva et al., 2025), search systems are now exposed to two interleaved streams of queries: a fraction α\alpha of queries is human-generated (organic query stream), the remaining fraction (1−α)(1-\alpha) of queries is issued by agents (synthetic query stream). Notably, the fraction α\alpha of organic search queries11
1
A separate problem relates to the prevalence of synthetic documents (colloquially, the “Dead Internet Theory” (Walter, 2025)). In this work, we instead focus on synthetic queries. is rapidly diminishing (Zhai, 2025).
Since IR has historically been human-centred (implicitly assuming α=1\alpha=1), with models, benchmarks, and evaluation methods designed around the information-seeking behaviours of human end-users, research has extensively characterised the organic stream as such.
By contrast, synthetic stream remained under-characterised and under-represented.
The two streams differ in several aspects.
Agents can generate queries at high speed and often produce reasoning-induced sub-queries (Lin et al., 2025; Huang et al., 2025; Plaat et al., 2025), lead
