6.1. Trace Statistics, Workloads & Query Length
Table 2 summarises the statistics about the traces in ASQ.
Initially note the significant volume of traces enables model optimisation and statistical significance testing, supporting the optimisability and assessability properties.
Additionally, the larger model, Qwen-7B, tends to issue a greater number of search calls (by up to +265%+265\%) and generate longer traces, substantially increasing workloads, end-to-end inference latency, and resource consumption.
Trace length variability is high: absolute standard deviation is higher for the larger model, relative standard deviation is higher for smaller ones. Consequently, high-capacity agents yield less predictable IR system workloads, whereas smaller ones, despite generally under-searching, occasionally perform extensive searches or get stuck in long loops.
Trace length maxima are high (up to 186). According to Tian et al. (2025a), long traces often occur when agents encounter difficulties in converging to high-quality answers.
Unlike humans, who are likely to abandon search sessions when unsatisfied — typically after 22 or 33 query reformulations (Lucchese et al., 2013) — agents can generate extremely long traces, overburdening IR systems.
Synthetic and organic queries have comparable lengths, except on HQA, whose queries are multi-faced and in-domain, where agents produced slightly longer queries. Among all the agents, Qwen-3B is the one issuing longer queries.
While retrieval effectiveness impacts end-to-end accuracy (Tian et al., 2025a), it does not alter search behaviours. Behavioural differences seem to be governed by agent capacity, optimisation strategy, and test data.
6.2. Human vs. Agentic Query Reformulations
Figure 1. Transition probability matrices representing human (left) and agent search behaviours (centre, right). Rows correspond to the current state and columns to the next state.
Following the methodology of Pass et al. (2006), we analyse agentic information seeking behaviours and compare them to those of humans.
We model aruns as Markov processes.
We map each query qiq_{i} in a trace to a state based on its relationship to its preceding queries in the same trace:
•
IN: initial state, a new query q0q_{0} is issued.
•
ADD: qiq_{i} is an expanded version of qi−1q_{i-1}.
•
REM: qiq_{i} is a subsequence of qi−1q_{i-1}.
•
REP: qiq_{i} is a resubmission of qi−1q_{i-1}.
•
DUP: qiq_{i} is an exact duplicate of qjq_{j} with j<(i−1)j<(i-1).
•
CH: qiq_{i} results from any other reformulation strategy.
•
OUT: terminal state (arun termination).
By aggregating all transitions between consecutive queries, for all traces, we build the transition matrix.
Finally, for each non-terminal state SS, we calculate the termination probability P⁡(OUT|S)P(\textsf{OUT}|S), and insert it into the matrix.
Figure 1 shows the mean-aggregated transition matrices for agents across the different experimental setups.
For comparison, we also show the transition matrix of human reformulations, with values taken from (Pass et al., 2006).
Before analysing the matrices, we identify two structural differences.
First, all reformulations in an arun are tied to the same initial query q0q_{0}, thus, the IN column is empty (all zeroes). For humans it is non-empty; instead, multiple interleaved searches may collapse into the same session.
Second, while REP in human sessions occurs by clicking on a "show more results" button, likely to increase recall, for aruns this occurs when qi=qi−1q_{i}=q_{i-1}.
We now compare the three matrices in Figure 1, focusing on differences between humans and agents.
For humans the most frequent arrival states are IN, REP, and CH, respectively, highlighting their multi-tasking, results browsing and substantial reformulations behaviours.
Agents more likely transition to OUT, CH, DUP. The high OUT probability is mainly due to the fact that aruns are tied to a single initial query, whereas high DUP probability indicates that agents often regress to previous queries, likely when trapped in long loops.
The second behavioural difference is that agents favour CH and DUP over REP. Traditional optimisation techniques like caching may be less effective in this new scenario. However, the tendency of agents to re-submit older queries could be exploited to improve retrieval effectiveness and efficiency.
Finally, the transition matrices of the synthetic streams are nearly identical, suggesting that the reformulation behaviour of AI agents is independent from the effectiveness of the retrieval pipeline.
6.3. Within-Trace Query Evolutions
Figure 2. Qwen-7B’s distribution of transition probabilities across consecutive iterations. Left: retrieval only. Right: retrieval and re-ranking. Stack ii shows the transition probabilities from iteration (i−1)(i-1) to ii; outlier iterations are omitted.
We next analyse how reformulation behaviour evolves over the course of aruns.
In Figure 2, we show the transition probabilities between pairs of consecutive iterations within an agentic run. A comparison with human search sessions would be valuable, but to our knowledge, no public data currently allows such analysis.
Several behavioural patters emerge from Figure 2.
First, agents tend to alternate between substantial reformulation (CH) and resubmission of prior queries (DUP). This suggests that they may cycle between trying to differentiate and reverting back to old knowledge upon failure, adopting a trial-and-error approach.
Second, query expansion via ADD and query scope narrowing by removing some terms (REM) are only applied in early iterations, representing initial efforts to refine the organic query.
Subsequent repetitions (REP) emerge from the third iteration onward, likely when agents begin to stall.
Finally, in-domain queries (HQA) show lower DUP rate compared to out-of-domain ones. This may indicate that the reformulation strategies learnt may generalise poorly and that reverting to prior queries is agent’s default when other strategies fail.
Notably, the observed patterns hold regardless of the retriever used. Thus, search behaviours are likely governed by the agent capacity and learned behaviours rather than by retrieval quality.
Overall, our findings suggest a shift in optimisation priorities in agentic IR as compared to traditional IR. Human search queries tend to be mistyped (Sun et al., 2012), short, and ambiguous, thus query expansion (Carpineto and Romano, 2012) and other query refinement methods
