https://arxiv.org/html/2602.17186v1
Selective Training for Large Vision Language Models via Visual Information Gain
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related Work
3 Visual Information Gain
3.1 Preliminary
3.2 Definition of VIG
3.3 Analysis
3.4 VIG-Guided Selective Training
4 Experiment
4.1 Tasks and Benchmarks
4.2 Overall Performance and Data Efficiency
4.3 Comparison with Existing Methods
4.4 Analysis
4.5 Ablation Study
5 Conclusion
References
A Details of Benchmarks
B Details of Visual Absence Simulation
C Details of VIG-guided Selective Training
C.1 Instruction-tuning Datasets and the Threshold τp\tau_{p}
C.2 Implementation Details
C.3 Qualitative Results
D Additional Analysis
D.1 Visual Attention Ratio
D.2 Blind Faith in Text
E Details of Ablation Study
E.1 Effectiveness of VIG-based Selection
E.1.1 Comprehensive Results
E.2 Effect of Selection Ratio
E.2.1 The threshold τp\tau_{p} values
E.2.2 Comprehensive Results
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17186v1 [cs.CV] 19 Feb 2026
Selective Training for Large Vision Language Models via Visual Information Gain
Seulbi Lee
Affiliation: Department of Data Science,
Seoul National University of Science and Technology
seulbi@ds.seoultech.ac.kr, shwang@seoultech.ac.kr
Sangheum Hwang
††thanks: Corresponding author
Affiliation: Department of Data Science,
Seoul National University of Science and Technology
seulbi@ds.seoultech.ac.kr, shwang@seoultech.ac.kr
Abstract
Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) have achieved remarkable progress, yet they often suffer from language bias, producing answers without relying on visual evidence. While prior work attempts to mitigate this issue through decoding strategies, architectural modifications, or curated instruction data, they typically lack a quantitative measure of how much individual training samples or tokens actually benefit from the image. In this work, we introduce Visual Information Gain (VIG), a perplexity-based metric that measures the reduction in prediction uncertainty provided by visual input. VIG enables fine-grained analysis at both sample and token levels, effectively highlighting visually grounded elements such as colors, spatial relations, and attributes. Leveraging this, we propose a VIG-guided selective training scheme that prioritizes high-VIG samples and tokens. This approach improves visual grounding and mitigates language bias, achieving superior performance with significantly reduced supervision by focusing exclusively on visually informative samples and tokens.
August 24, 2026
1 Introduction
Large Vision Language Models (LVLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9] have demonstrated remarkable capabilities across a wide spectrum of multimodal tasks, ranging from image captioning [10, 11] and visual question answering [12, 13, 2] to more complex instruction following [14, 15, 16] and reasoning [17, 18]. By combining powerful large language models [19, 20, 21, 22] with pre-trained vision encoders [23, 24], LVLMs can generate fluent and context-aware responses conditioned on both images and textual queries. However, despite this progress, it remains challenging to ensure that LVLMs are reliably grounded in the visual input rather than dominated by textual priors [25, 26, 27].
(a) A sample that can be answered from common sense
(b) A sample that requires fine-grained visual understanding
Figure 1: Examples of LLaVA-1.5 instruction tuning data. The dataset includes both samples and tokens with very different levels of visual dependency: some questions can be answered without looking at the image, whereas others need fine-grained visual details (highlighted in green).
A growing body of work has shown that LVLMs often exhibit language bias: an over-reliance on language even when relevant visual evidence is available [28]. This bias manifes
