https://arxiv.org/html/2602.17097v1
AudioChat: Unified Audio Storytelling,Editing, and Understanding with Transfusion Forcing
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related Work
3 Audio Story Processing
3.1 Problem Formulation
3.2 AudioCopilot
3.3 Training and Evaluation
4 AudioChat
4.1 Architecture
4.2 Audio Transfusion Forcing
4.3 Multi-Stage Training
5 Experiments
5.1 Audio Editing
5.2 Audio Storytelling
5.3 Audio Understanding
5.4 Architecture
6 Conclusion and Future Work
References
A AudioCopilot
A.1 Architecture
A.2 Data Generation Process
A.3 Data Quality
B Architecture
B.1 Tokenizer
B.2 Language Model
C Training Settings
C.1 Training Data
C.2 Hyper-parameters
D Inference Settings
E Evaluation Settings
E.1 multiFLAM
E.2 Δ\DeltamultiFLAM
E.3 editFLAM
E.4 Human Evaluation
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2602.17097v1 [cs.SD] 19 Feb 2026
AudioChat: Unified Audio Storytelling,
Editing, and Understanding with Transfusion Forcing
William Chen
Affiliation: Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Correspondence to: williamchen@cmu.edu
Prem Seetharaman
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Correspondence to: pseeth@adobe.com
Rithesh Kumar
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Affiliation: OpenAI. Work performed while at Adobe
Oriol Nieto
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Shinji Watanabe
Affiliation: Language Technologies Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
Justin Salamon
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Zeyu Jin
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Abstract
Despite recent breakthroughs, audio foundation models struggle in processing complex multi-source acoustic scenes. We refer to this challenging domain as audio stories, which can have multiple speakers and background/foreground sound effects. Compared to traditional audio processing tasks, audio stories introduce new layers of semantic, temporal, and physical complexity. To address this challenge, we propose AudioChat, a framework for developing audio foundation models that can generate, edit, and understand audio stories. AudioChat introduces a new paradigm in which LLM-based toolcalling agents simulate interactions between users and the system, and these simulated dialogues are used as training data. We also introduce a novel Audio Transfusion Forcing objective to train the AudioChat model, allowing it to simultaneously decompose high-level instructions via structured chain-of-thought reasoning and perform interactive multi-turn audio understanding/generation. To evaluate generation and editing performance, we develop three new metrics that directly measure task performance instead of relying upon distribution-based scoring. We highly encourage readers to visit our demo to better understand the capabilities of AudioChat: https://wanchichen.github.io/audiochat/.
Keywords: Diffusion, audio generation, LLM
1 Introduction
Audio is a critical component in digital multi-media, acting as a foundational element for an immersive experience when consuming movies, podcasts, and audiobooks. Recent advances in foundation models (Valle et al., 2025; Evans et al., 2025; Défossez et al., 2024; Radford et al., 2023; Peng et al., 2023; Chen et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2023a) have demonstrated the remarkable ability of large-scale models in understanding and generating audio. However, these models focus on understanding and generating individual sounds, and are still limited in their ability to process complex acoustic scenes with multiple sound sources.
We refer to this frontier domain as audio story processing, which requires models to handle both non-speech and speech sounds with potentially multiple sources. It involves new challenges that are not found in typical text-to-speech (TTS), text-to-audio (T2A), and audio captioning (AC) tasks. Open-ended audio story editing represents the apex of such research, as it requires models to perform both audio story understanding and storytelling at a fine-grained level, such that only the desired elements to be edited are changed. Models must not only learn speech-specific details such as emotion and timbre, but also their relationship with non-speech sounds, such as ambience and pacing.
In this work, we present AudioChat, an audio foundation model that can perform open-ended text-guided audio understanding,
