DDiT: Dynamic Patch Scheduling for Efficient Diffusion Transformers
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related work
3 Approach
3.1 Preliminaries on Diffusion Transformers
3.2 Dynamic Patching and Tokenization
3.3 Dynamic Patch Scheduling
4 Experiments
4.1 Setup
4.2 Text-to-Image Generation
4.3 Text-to-Video Generation
4.4 Analysis
5 Conclusion and Future Work
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2602.16968v1 [cs.CV] 19 Feb 2026
DDiT: Dynamic Patch Scheduling for Efficient Diffusion Transformers
Dahye Kim11
1
Work done as an intern at Amazon.
††thanks: Work done during internship at Amazon
Affiliation: Boston University
Affiliation: Amazon{dahye, dghadiya}@bu.edu raghudeep.g@gmail.com
Deepti Ghadiyaram
Affiliation: Boston University
Raghudeep Gadde
Affiliation: Amazon{dahye, dghadiya}@bu.edu raghudeep.g@gmail.com
Abstract
Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) have achieved state-of-the-art performance in image and video generation, but their success comes at the cost of heavy computation. This inefficiency is largely due to the fixed tokenization process, which uses constant-sized patches throughout the entire denoising phase, regardless of the content’s complexity.
We propose dynamic tokenization, an efficient test-time strategy that varies patch sizes based on content complexity and the denoising timestep. Our key insight is that early timesteps only require coarser patches to model global structure, while later iterations demand finer (smaller-sized) patches to refine local details. During inference, our method dynamically reallocates patch sizes across denoising steps for image and video generation and substantially reduces cost while preserving perceptual generation quality. Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach: it achieves up to 3.52×3.52\times and 3.2×3.2\times speedup on FLUX-1.Dev and Wan 2.12.1, respectively, without compromising the generation quality and prompt adherence.
Figure 1: DDiT dynamically selects the optimal patch size at each denoising step at inference yielding significant computational gains at no loss of perceptual quality. Results are shown for FLUX-1.Dev [54] for text-to-image and Wan-2.1 [107] for text-to-video generation.
The top panel denotes the baseline (original model), while the remaining panels illustrate outputs from DDiT at different acceleration rates.
ImageReward [118], CLIP [83], and VBench [43] scores are reported (higher is better).
1 Introduction
Diffusion transformers (DiTs) [81, 22, 54, 92, 8, 53, 117] have emerged as a dominant framework for content generation, producing high-quality and photorealistic results in both image and video synthesis.
These advances have facilitated a wide range of applications, including image and video editing [7, 48], subject-driven generation [86, 111], and digital art creation [74]. However, this impressive performance comes with substantial computational cost – generating a single 55 second 720​p720p video using Wan-2.1 [107] on an RTX 4090 takes 3030 minutes! – significantly limiting the usage of these models in practice.
Such high computational demands of generative models have catapulted the development of more efficient generation methods. Existing research has broadly focused on acceleration techniques such as feature caching
[71, 127, 61, 62], feature pruning
[6, 26, 108, 125], vector quantization [94, 97, 104, 18], and model distillation [91, 59, 49, 129].
Although these approaches show promise, they suffer from two key limitations. First, many methods [40, 25, 114, 71] typically employ a hard, static reduction strategy, such as removing a fixed amount of weights, operations, or tokens.
Such static approach can lead to significant quality degradation, as computations critical to a specific output might be permanently discarded [114, 18].
Second, most existing methods [72, 114, 71]
apply a rigid, one-size-fits-all strategy, that is agnostic to the input. This is problematic, as different prompts require varying levels of computational detail [110, 73]. A simple prompt like “a blue sky” should not require the same amount of computational resources compared to a prompt “a scene crowded with many zebras.” The rigidity in all existing solutions prevents us from dynamically allocating resources where they are needed most.
In this work, we address the rigid, one-size-fits-all computation of existing methods. Our approach is based on a key observation: the visual content generated by a diffusion model evolves at varied levels of detail. Some denoising timesteps establish coarse scene structure, while others refine fine-grained visual details.
Recent studies [56, 99, 103, 50] show that features generated at different timesteps of the denoising process encode different information, thus selecting the right timestep of diffusion features is important for successful downstream tasks such as classification [56], visual reasoning [50], visual correspondence [103], and semantic segmentation [99].
Furthermore, [80, 110] note that this information can also be used for image editing, catering to different levels of detail in an image [73, 80, 110], and for generating more prompt-aligned images by injecting different levels of prompt information at different timesteps [90].
This leads us to a critical question: should every denoising step process the latent at the same granularity? Or, could some steps operate on a coarser latent, thereby yielding computational benefits, while others use a finer latent to preserve detail?
Thus, unlike prior works [6, 26, 108, 125] which approach efficiency by discarding weights or operations, we dynamically allocate it. Specifically, at every timestep, we adjust the patch size of the latent and adaptively use larger patches (coarser granularity) when less detail is required and smaller patches (finer granularity) when high fidelity is needed.
This, however, raises a new question: how do we determine the optimal patch size at any given timestep and for any given prompt? For this, we measure the rate of change of the latent manifold over time. We hypothesize that this rate correlates with the level of detail being generated. If the underlying latent evolves slowly within a short timestep wi
