Convergence Analysis of Two-Layer Neural Networks underGaussian Input Masking
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related Work
3 Problem Setup
4 Expectation of the Loss and Gradient under Gaussian Mask
5 Convergence Guarantee of Training with Gaussian Mask
6 Experiments
6.1 Empirical Validation of Training Convergence with Gaussian Mask.
6.2 Impact of Multiplicative Gaussian Noise on Model Accuracy
6.3 Application: Distributed Training over Wireless Channels
6.4 Efficacy of Multiplicative Gaussian Noise Against Membership Inference Attacks
6.4.1 Results and Discussion
7 Conclusion
References
A Additional Experimental Results and Related Details.
A.1 Empirical Validation of Expected Gradient Properties (Theorem ).
A.2 Experimental Details for Section
A.2.1 Multiplicative Gaussian noise vs Differential privacy
B Proofs in Section
B.1 General Form of Expected Loss
B.2 Proof of Theorem
B.3 Proof of Theorem
C Proofs in Section
C.1 Proof of Theorem
C.2 Proof of Theorem
C.2.1 Proof of Corollary
C.2.2 Proof of Corollary
C.2.3 Proof of Lemma
D Auxiliary Results
D.1 Gaussian Random Variables
D.1.1 Conditional Expectation and Covariance
D.1.2 Approximation of CDF
D.1.3 Uni-variate Coupled Expectation
D.1.4 Multi-variate Coupled Expectation
D.1.5 Other Results
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17423v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026
Convergence Analysis of Two-Layer Neural Networks under
Gaussian Input Masking
​​Afroditi Kolomvaki ak203@rice.edu
Affiliation: Computer Science Dept., Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
Fangshuo Liao fangshuo.liao@rice.edu
Affiliation: Computer Science Dept., Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
Evan Dramko ed55@rice.edu
Affiliation: Computer Science Dept., Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
Ziyun Guang cg105@rice.edu
Affiliation: Computer Science Dept., Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
Anastasios Kyrillidis anastasios@rice.edu
Affiliation: Computer Science Dept., Rice University, Houston, TX, USA
Abstract
We investigate the convergence guarantee of two-layer neural network training with Gaussian randomly masked inputs. This scenario corresponds to Gaussian dropout at the input level, or noisy input training common in sensor networks, privacy-preserving training, and federated learning, where each user may have access to partial or corrupted features. Using a Neural Tangent Kernel (NTK) analysis, we demonstrate that training a two-layer ReLU network with Gaussian randomly masked inputs achieves linear convergence up to an error region proportional to the mask’s variance. A key technical contribution is resolving the randomness within the non-linear activation, a problem of independent interest.
1 Introduction
Neural networks (NNs) have revolutionized AI applications, where their success largely stems from their ability to learn complex patterns when trained on well-curated datasets (Schuhmann et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023b; Gunasekar et al., 2023; Edwards, 2024).
A component to the success of NNs is its ability to model a broad range of tasks and data distributions under various scenarios. Empirical evidence has suggested neural network’s ability to learn even under noisy input (Kariotakis et al., 2024), gradient noise (Ruder, 2017), as well as modifications to the internal representations during training (Srivastava et al., 2014; Yuan et al., 2022). Leveraging such ability of the neural networks, many real-world deployment adopts a modification to the data representations during training to achieve particular goals such as robustness, privacy, or efficiency. Among the methods, perturbing the representations with an additive noise has been studied by a number of prior works (Gao et al., 2019; Li et al., 2025; Li et al., 2023a; Madry et al., 2018; Loo et al., 2022; Tsilivis and Kempe, 2022; Ilyas et al., 2019), showcasing both the benefit of such perturbation and the stable convergence of the training under this setting. Compared with additive noise, perturbing the representations by multiplying it with a mask has rarely been studied theoretically.
Perturbing the representations with multiplicative noise appears in many real-world settings, either by design or unintentionally. For instance, in federated learning (FL) settings (McMahan et al., 2017; Kairouz et al., 2021), particularly vertical FL (Cheng et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2021; Romanini et al., 2021; He et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024), different features of the input data may be available to different parties, effectively creating a form of sparsity-inducing multiplicative masking on the input space. Moreover, the drop-out family (Srivastava et al., 2014; Rey and Mnih, 2021) is a class of methods to prevent overfitting and improve generalization ability of neural networks during training. Lastly, training models under data-parallel protocol over a wireless channel incurs the channel effect that blurs the data passed to the workers through a multiplication Tse and Viswanath (2005).
Theoretically analyzing the training dynamics of neural networks under these settings are difficult, especially when the introduced randomness are intertwined with the nonlinearity of the activation function. While there has been previous work that studies the convergence of neural network training under drop-out (Liao and Kyrillidis, 2022; Mianjy and Arora, 2020), they often assume that the drop-out happens after the nonlinear activations are applied. From a technical perspective, statistics of the neural network outputs are easier to handle as the randomness are not affected by the nonlinearity.
In this paper, we take a step further into the understanding of multiplicative perturbations in neural network training by considering noise applied before the nonlinear activation. In particular, the setting we consider is the training of a two-layer MLP where the inputs bears a multiplicative Gaussian mask. This prototype provides a simplified scenario to study the noise-inside-activation difficulty, while generalizes various training scenarios ranging from input masking (Kariotakis et al., 2024) to Gaussian drop-out (Rey and Mnih, 2021), if one views the input in our setting as fixed embeddings from previous layers of a deep neural network. Under this setting, we aim to answer the following question:
How do multiplicative perturbations at the input level propagate through the network
and affect the training dynamics?
Our Contributions.
Analyzing the training dynamics under the Gaussian masks over the input means that we have to study the statistical properties of random variables inside a non-linear function.
Our work takes a step towards resolving this technical difficulty. Moreover, we utilize an NTK-based analysis (Du et al., 2018; Song and
Yang, 2020; Oymak and
Soltanolkotabi, 2019; L
