URL: https://arxiv.org/html/2602.17200v1
Status: 200
D.1 Limitations
While our proposed GASS method effectively enhances T2I diversity and explores the residual space beyond the given prompts, similar to other sampling-based post-training guidance methods, it incurs extra inference time compared to the original sampling process. Specifically, we note that the major additional computational overhead comes from its current reliance on the CLIP space, which requires extra pixel encoding, gradient-based optimization, and pixel decoding for spread expansion. As we note in the main paper, the current inference time, under 20 GASS applied sampling steps, is around 3.68 seconds per batch, versus 1.71 seconds in the original setting.
While GASS already offers the possibility to reduce this overhead by applying expansion into fewer steps, one potential future direction to mitigate this is through orthogonal acceleration techniques, such as building a dedicated embedding space directly into the generative model, thus eliminating the need for external CLIP inference. Future work could explore such integrated approaches to achieve geometric diversity guidance with minimal computational overhead.
D.2 Failure Cases Analysis
While our proposed GASS effectively enhances image diversity in most cases, as demonstrated by extensive non-cherry-picked qualitative results in the main paper and appendix, we identify several failure cases where the method produces suboptimal outputs, as illustrated in Fig. 8.
Specifically, we observe that a small fraction of generated images remain similar to baseline samples under vanilla CFG. We attribute this to the fact that our expansion perturbations δidep\delta_{i}^{\text{dep}} and δiind\delta_{i}^{\text{ind}} are uniformly sampled from zero-mean distributions. While the probability of both perturbations being simultaneously close to zero is very low, such cases do occur, which result in rather trivial modifications after GASS. Importantly, these isolated instances do not impact the overall batch-level diversity metrics, as diversity is measured across the entire batch rather than individual samples.
Figure 8: Failure case analysis. (Left): A small number of images still resemble the original ones after GASS. (Right:) When the base models can’t generate accurate counts specified by the prompt, despite GASS introducing extra diversity, it is less likely to correct these inconsistencies by itself.
In another failure scenario, we observe cases where the base model struggles to accurately follow complex prompts (e.g., “Three cats and two dogs sitting on the grass”). While GASS introduces diversity in secondary attributes such as layout and style, it cannot independently correct these semantic misalignments. This limitation stems from our sampling-based approach relying on frozen pretrained
models, and thus, we are fundamentally bounded by the base model’s capabilities for downstream tasks requiring specific understanding (e.g., numeracy reasoning). Improving performance in such cases would
require enhancing the base model itself, which is beyond the scope of post-hoc sampling interventions.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue" (
) b
