Reverso: Efficient Time Series Foundation Models for Zero-shot Forecasting
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related Work
Time series foundation models.
Transformer alternatives for time series modeling.
3 Methods
3.1 Architecture
Embedding layer.
Sequence mixing.
Channel mixing.
Decoder head.
Training objective.
3.2 Dataset
Pretraining dataset.
Data augmentation.
Synthetic data.
3.3 Inference
Flip equivariance.
Downsampling.
4 Empirical Study
4.1 Experimental Setup
Baselines.
4.2 Main Results: Zero-Shot Forecasting Performance
Gift-Eval.
LTSF/TSLib.
4.3 Ablations
Architecture.
Data augmentation and synthetic data.
Inference.
5 Discussion
6 Conclusion
References
A Data generation and augmentation details
A.1 Synthetic data composition
A.2 Data augmentation specifics
B Extended results on Gift-Eval
C Detailed results for LTSF/TSLib
D Downsampling Algorithm
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17634v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026
Reverso: Efficient Time Series Foundation Models for Zero-shot Forecasting
Xinghong Fu
Affiliation: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Correspondence to: fxh@mit.edu
Yanhong Li
Affiliation: Allen Institute for AI
Georgios Papaioannou
Affiliation: Qube Research & Technologies
Yoon Kim
Affiliation: Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Abstract
Learning time series foundation models has been shown to be a promising approach for zero-shot time series forecasting across diverse time series domains. Insofar as scaling has been a critical driver of performance of foundation models in other modalities such as language and vision, much recent work on time series foundation modeling has focused on scaling. This has resulted in time series foundation models with hundreds of millions of parameters that are, while performant, inefficient and expensive to use in practice. This paper describes a simple recipe for learning efficient foundation models for zero-shot time series forecasting that are orders of magnitude smaller. We show that large-scale transformers are not necessary: small hybrid models that interleave long convolution and linear RNN layers (in particular DeltaNet layers) can match the performance of larger transformer-based models while being more than a hundred times smaller. We also describe several data augmentation and inference strategies that further improve performance. This recipe results in Reverso, a family of efficient time series foundation models for zero-shot forecasting that significantly push the performance-efficiency Pareto frontier.
https://github.com/shinfxh/reverso
Figure 1: Zero-shot performance on the full Gift-Eval test set (Aksu et al., 2024). Reverso sets a new performance-efficiency Pareto frontier compared to existing time series foundation models.
1 Introduction
Time series forecasting is a core problem in machine learning with widespread applications including in weather forecasting, energy grid analysis, supply chain logistics, financial predictions, and more. Traditionally, statistical models (Box and Jenkins, 1970; Engle, 1982; Bollerslev, 1986; Harvey, 1990; Hyndman and Khandakar, 2008) as well as deep learning approaches based on RNNs (Elman, 1990; Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997; Cho et al., 2014) have enjoyed great success in time series forecasting (Goel et al., 2017; Qin et al., 2017; Petneházi, 2019; Hewamalage et al., 2021, i.a.). More recently, models based on the transformer architecture (Vaswani et al., 2017) have led to further improvements (Nie et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2021; Wu et al., 2021; Zhou et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2022b, i.a.).
These initial deep learning-based approaches to time series forecasting were dataset-specific, and thus trained models for particular domains/tasks of interest. While such models can attain high accuracy when sufficient in-distribution data are available, they incur substantial costs in data collection and model training/maintenance. This approach moreover stands in stark contrast to recent progress in domains such as language, vision, and biology, where foundation models pretrained on broad datasets have been found to be useful across many tasks with little or no task-specific training (Bommasani, 2021).
The successes of foundation models in other modalities have motivated the recent line of work on time series foundation models (TSFM; Garza et al., 2023; Ansari et al., 2024; Das et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2024; Woo et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025b; Liu et al., 2025c; Graf et al., 2025; Auer et al., 2025; Moroshan et al., 2025, i.a.). TSFMs are large-scale neural networks trained on heterogeneous time series data taken from broad domains (see Liang et al. (2024) and Kottapalli et al. (2025) for surveys). A particularly useful capability of decoder-based TSFMs is their ability to perform zero-shot forecasting via in-context learning, i.e., predicting the future given any historical time series data given as context. These TSFMs can thus serve as a domain-general tool for time series forecasting, enabling the deployment of models in domains where task-specific training data may be scarce.
However, insofar as scaling has been a critical driver of progress of foundation models in other domains, much existing work has focused on scaling TSFMs, i.e., training ever-larger models on ever-larger datasets. For example, Sun et al. (2025) train a series of models up to 1.5B parameters and observe continuous improvements with scaling model size. While such large models can be performant, their sheer size can make them prohibitively expensive to train and deploy.
In this work, we revisit the core assumption that large-scale models are necessary for TSFMs. We show that small models that interleave long convolution layers (Fu et al., 2023b) and modern linear RNN layers (in particular DeltaNet layers (Schlag et al., 2021; Yang et al., 2024b)) can match or outperform TSFMs that are orders of magnitude larger. We also study and ablate myriad data augmentation and inference-time strategies to arrive at a simple recipe that works well in practice. With our recipe, we train a family of TSFMs (dubbed Reverso) from 0.2M to 2.6M parameters that significantly push the performance-efficiency frontier, as shown in Figure 1.
2 Related Work
Time series foundation models.
Our work is related to the existing research program around time series foundation models (TSFMs), which aim to train domain-general models for time series analysis and forecasting. TimeGPT (Garza et al., 2023), TimesFM (Das et al., 2024), and Lag-LLaMA (Rasul et al., 2023) were some of the first works to show that decoder-only transformers can be utilized to train TSFMs with strong zero-shot forecasting performance. Timer (Liu et al., 2024) and Timer-XL (Liu et al., 2025b) scaled such generative pretraining with dataset size, model size and context length. Moirai (Woo et al., 2024) incorporates a masked encoder to handle multivariate forecasting from various distributions. Chronos (Ansari et al., 2024) fixes the vocabulary of time series patches, while Chronos-2 (Ansari et al., 2025) introduced the group attention mechanism for multivariate forecasting. Xihe (Sun et al., 2025) scales up TSFMs to over a billion parameters with a hierarchical block attention mechanism. PatchTST-FM-r1 (Wen et al., 2026) showed that a generic patched transformer can also achieve competitive results.
A complementary line of work reuses large language models directly for time series by reprogramming or aligning them to TS tasks (Zhou et al., 2023; Jin et al., 2023; Chang et al., 2025). However, recent studies suggest that the LLM backbone often provides little benefit over simpler LLM-free baselines (Tan et al., 2024), motivating dedicated TSFMs such as those discussed above.
Figure 2: Reverso architectur
