ABCD: All Biases Come Disguised
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related work
3 Problem Formulation
4 Matching answers - bias-reduced evaluation protocol
5 Results
5.1 Models, datasets, and parameters
5.2 NonsenseQA
5.3 Reasoning benchmarks: CSQA and ARC.
5.4 Across languages: INCLUDE.
5.5 Larger number of options: MMLU-Pro.
5.6 Difficult questions: GPQA.
5.7 SCORE alone overlooks evaluation biases.
5.8 Cross-Benchmark Agreement
5.9 Ablation studies
6 Conclusion
References
A Selected datasets
B On the advantages of sentence similarity over cloze evaluation.
C The different types of models based on few-shot and label biases
D Ablation study
D.1 The choice of sentence similarity model and function has limited impact.
D.2 Impact of the symbols used and the non-uniformity
E NonsenseQA - Bias Decomposition
E.1 Standard & Letter
E.2 Standard & Dash
E.3 Matched & Letter
E.4 Matched & Dash
E.5 Full comparison
F Evaluation details
F.1 Computational cost
F.2 Regular expression used
F.3 Default parameters and prompt modification
F.4 Prompt example - Matched
G Code and benchmark release
H Limitations
I Detailed results
I.1 NonsenseQA - detailed results
I.2 Real benchmark - detailed results
I.3 On the SCORE paradox - capturing bias
J Cross-Benchmark Agreement - Kendall Tau and Spearman differences
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17445v1 [cs.CL] 19 Feb 2026
ABCD: All Biases Come Disguised
Mateusz Nowak*
Xavier Cadet
††thanks: Equal contribution
Peter Chin
Affiliation: Dartmouth College
Abstract
Multiple-choice question (MCQ) benchmarks have been a standard evaluation practice for measuring LLMs’ ability to reason and answer knowledge-based questions. Through a synthetic NonsenseQA benchmark, we observe that different LLMs exhibit varying degrees of label-position-few-shot-prompt bias, where the model either uses the answer position, the label in front of the answer, the distributions of correct answers present in the few-shot prompt, or a combination of all to answer each MCQ question. We propose a simple bias-reduced evaluation protocol that replaces the labels of each question with uniform, unordered labels and prompts the LLM to use the whole answer presented. With a simple sentence similarity model, we demonstrate improved robustness and lower standard deviation between different permutations of answers with a minimal drop in LLM’s performance, exposing the LLM’s capabilities under reduced evaluation artifacts, without any help from the prompt examples or the option labels. Across multiple benchmarks and models, this protocol substantially improves the robustness to answer permutations, reducing mean accuracy variance 3×3\times with only a minimal decrease in the mean model’s performance. Through ablation studies on various embedding models and similarity functions, we show that the method is more robust than the standard ones.
1 Introduction
Multiple-choice questions (MCQs) are a standard paradigm for evaluating the reasoning and question-answering capabilities of large language models (LLMs), spanning benchmarks from commonsense reasoning (CommonsenseQA; CSQA) [29] to graduate-level, Google-proof scientific questions (GPQA) [23]. However, more broadly, many real-world decision-making scenarios can be cast as MCQs by just enumerating candidate options. However, LLMs are known to be sensitive to superficial MCQ artifacts.
Zheng et al. [39] shows that an “answer-moving attack”, which simply moves the golden answer to a specific position, causes LLMs’ dramatic performance fluctuations. Building upon this work, Zhou et al. [40] evaluates the influence of position shuffling, label replacement with emoji symbols, and format question change to True/False, showing that the decline in accuracy is more pronounced for option label replacement than for position shuffle. While [39] demonstrated position and label bias through ”answer-moving attacks”, they did not investigate how models exploit patterns in few-shot examples. Building upon both works, we reveal a critical dimension not explored in prior research: few-shot prompt distribution bias.
We propose NonsenseQA, a simple synthetic dataset of random-word questions and options with a randomly assigned correct answer, to quantify evaluation biases. Using NonsenseQA, we demonstrate that different models exhibit fundamentally different behaviors: some models explicitly exploit the few-shot answer distribution in their reasoning to reach >95%>95\% accuracy on meaningless inputs, while others achieve only ∼40%\sim 40\% without explicitly referencing the prompt examples, showing that MCQ bias is more complex and model-specific than previously.
Building on insights from NonsenseQA, we propose a bias-reduced evaluation protocol for multiple-choice LLM assessment. The protocol uses homogenous, unordered option labels and requires full-text answer generation, minimizing exploitable artifacts while improving robustness. Under this setting, models achieve near-chance accuracy on NonsenseQA while incurring only minimal performance degradation on standard MCQ benchmarks. To accommodate paraphrased answers, we match generated responses to candidate options using semantic similarity.
We evaluate the protocol across 13 LLMs and five benchmarks -– MMLU-Pro [34], GPQA [23], CommonsenseQA [29], ARC [8], and a subset of INCLUDE [27]. The results show an improved robustness, reflected in the combination of a higher SCORE [19] with reduced variance ratio. Ablation studies confirm that performance is stable across similarity models and matching functions.
The contributions of this paper are:
•
Simple practical evaluation debiasing solution: We propose a simple, single-pass, bias-reduced MCQ evaluation standard that combines uniform option labels, full-text answer generation, and semantic matching, requiring neither model fine-tuning nor access to raw output probabilities, while substantially reducing shortcut exploitation and only requiring an additional 3% computation time. We evaluate our design on multiple benchmarks, motivating our design choices with thorough ablation studies.
•
NonsenseQA: We propose a debiasing tool, the NonsenseQA dataset, that uses random words to show different biases present within LLMs when it comes to question answering, ranging from labels used to present the answer, the mode of the answer, the position of the answer, and the distribution of the correct answers present in the few-shot prompt.
•
Few-shot prompt and answer format bias analysis: We identify and characterize previously underexplored biases in MCQ-based LLM evaluation, including few-shot answer distribution bias and answer-mode bias, and demonstrate that these artifacts can be systematically exploited even on semantically meaning
