6.3. Canon’s scalability and sensitivity to data
Figure 15. Sensitivity to data size & arithmetic intensity
When operating within the compute roofline, our architecture remains entirely scalable like a systolic array. By increasing the number of PEs, we can effectively scale out our architecture. However, for the irregular workloads we target, the theoretical arithmetic intensity i.e. “the number of computations per unit of data” has a significant impact on performance.
This overhead occurs more frequently because each data element fetched results in only a few actual computations. To assess the sensitivity of Canon to arithmetic intensity, we scaled both the size of the sparse tensor problems and the size of the PE array (a 8×8\times larger workload on a 8×8\times larger fabric). By adjusting the input shapes and sparsity levels, we acheive different arithmetic intensities for the inputs. Figure 15 illustrates the compute utilization of Canon with respect to problem size and arithmetic intensity. Our results indicate that Canon’s compute utilization is primarily sensitive to arithmetic intensity, with no clear correlation to problem/array size, demonstrating the scalability of Canon.
6.4. Data memory Size vs. Off-Chip Bandwidth
The size of the on-chip data memory significantly influences the required off-chip bandwidth. Additionally, the bandwidth requirement depends on the arithmetic intensity of the workload.
To evaluate the off-chip bandwidth requirements, we randomly generate SpMM computations
across various sparsity levels, thereby altering the arithmetic intensity. We adopt a dense-stationary tiling strategy (i.e. the dense matrix stays on-chip) because the sparse input inherently reduces off-chip traffic due to its sparsity.
Figure 16 presents the results. As the arithmetic intensity decreases (i.e., as sparsity increases), our architecture maintains high throughput; however, the bandwidth requirement increases because fewer computations are performed per data element. For buffer sizes large enough to hold the entire input data (SRAM size above 576KB), the off-chip bandwidth reaches its minimal value. The increased off-chip traffic at lower arithmetic intensities reflects the extra bandwidth needed for output data. It is important to note that at higher sparsity levels, although we consume more bandwidth to maintain the same amount of computation, the effective equivalent dense computation is substantially higher. For example, at a sparsity level of 95%, we may use approximately 7x more bandwidth, but the equivalent dense throughput increases by ≈\approx 16x (not 20x due to under-utilization).
Considering the LPDDR5X as the off-chip memory, we plot the bandwidths for configurations using a single-die 16× lanes and a dual-die 32× module. The system-level design of Canon should consider the problem’s arithmetic intensity and the total cost of ownership of the on-chip and off-chip memory devices. For instance, design point A is preferable when a higher off-chip budget is available; design point B (our current configuration) is preferable when there is a higher on-chip memory budget and a higher probability of low arithmetic intensity. If the target workload is known to have higher arithmetic intensity, one can reduce the budget for both off-chip and on-chip memory (design point C).
Figure 16. Canon bandwidth requirements to hit the compute roofline for varying arithmetic intensity (sparsity increases left to right)
6.5. Handling Load Imbalance with the Scratchpad
Figure 17 presents an ablation study highlighting the impact of scratchpad size on Canon’s performance. An appropriately sized scratchpad can mitigate load imbalance by buffering data and amortizing the irregularity, thereby enhancing overall fabric utilization. However, if the scratchpad is too large, it introduces overhead because PEs unnecessarily buffer data in anticipation of irregularity that may not be present. As shown in the results, incorporating an optimally sized scratchpad of 16 entries leads to 10-20% increase in compute utilization compared to 1 entry (a single register) for input sparsity levels of 60% and above.
Figure 17. Impact of scratchpad depth on utilization
Although the scratchpad size is fixed at fabrication time, the effective buffer size can be software-managed by changing the memory management logic that is programmed to the orchestrator FSM. In the performance evaluations presented in Section 6.2, conservatively, we assume no prior knowledge about the sparsity and, therefore, use a buffer size of 16 entries. By incorporating compile-time knowledge about the expected sparsity range (S1, S2, S3), Canon achieves an additional 5% performance improvement on average by adjusting the effective scratchpad range
