A Data-Driven Dynamic Execution Orchestration Architecture
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract.
1 Introduction
2 Canon Architecture
Data-Driven Orchestration:
Time-Lapsed SIMD Execution:
2.1 Reduced Control Cost
2.2 Reduced Data-Handling Costs
3 CANON Micro-architecture
3.1 ISA and PE Control
3.2 Orchestrator Microarchitecture
4 Canon Application Mapping
4.1 Mapping Sparse Kernels
4.1.1 Case Study: SpMM
4.1.2 Case Study: SDDMM
4.1.3 Case study: Structured Sparsity
4.2 Mapping General Kernels
5 Evaluation Methodology
6 Evaluation Results
6.1 Incrementally evaluating the cost of generality
Area cost
Power cost
6.2 Performance versus Flexibility
6.3 Canon’s scalability and sensitivity to data
6.4 Data memory Size vs. Off-Chip Bandwidth
6.5 Handling Load Imbalance with the Scratchpad
7 Related Works
8 Conclusion & Future Work
Acknowledgements
References
A Detailed SpMM Mapping
B Detailed SDDMM Mapping
C FSM behavioural insights
Case 1 (Normal Operation)
Case 2 (Row Completion and Psum Forwarding)
Case 3 (Early psum Arrival and Bypass)
D Using Canon for Spatial Execution
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17119v1 [cs.AR] 19 Feb 2026
A Data-Driven Dynamic Execution Orchestration Architecture
Conference: Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1; March 22–26, 2026; Pittsburgh, PA, USAProceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems, Volume 1 (ASPLOS ’26), March 22–26, 2026, Pittsburgh, PA, USADOI: 10.1145/3760250.3762226ISBN: 979-8-4007-2165-6/26/03CCS: Computer systems organization Parallel architecturesCCS: Computer systems organization Reconfigurable computingCCS: Computer systems organization Data flow architectures
,
Zhenyu Bai
Note: Both authors contributed equally to this research.
email: zhenyu.bai@nus.edu.sg
Affiliation: School of Computing, National University of , Singapore, Singapore
Affiliation: , ,
,
Pranav Dangi
email: dangi@comp.nus.edu.sg
Affiliation: School of Computing, National University of , Singapore, Singapore
Affiliation: , ,
,
Rohan Juneja
email: rohan@comp.nus.edu.sg
Affiliation: School of Computing, National University of , Singapore, Singapore
,
Zhaoying Li
Note: Corresponding author
email: zhaoying@comp.nus.edu.sg
Affiliation: School of Computing, National University of , Singapore, Singapore
,
Zhanglu Yan
email: zlyan@nus.edu.sg
Affiliation: School of Computing, National University of , Singapore, Singapore
,
Huiying Lan
email: huiying.lan@lumai.co.uk
Affiliation: Lumai Ltd., Oxford, UK
and
Tulika Mitra
email: tulika@comp.nus.edu.sg
Affiliation: School of Computing, National University of , Singapore, Singapore
© cc
Abstract.
Domain-specific accelerators deliver exceptional performance on their target workloads through fabrication-time orchestrated datapaths. However, such specialized architectures often exhibit performance fragility when exposed to new kernels or irregular input patterns. In contrast, programmable architectures like FPGAs, CGRAs, and GPUs rely on compile-time orchestration to support a broader range of applications; but they are typically less efficient under irregular or sparse data. Pushing the boundaries of programmable architectures requires designs that can achieve efficiency and high-performance on par with specialized accelerators while retaining the agility of general-purpose architectures.
We introduce Canon, a parallel architecture that bridges the gap between specialized and general purpose architectures. Canon exploits data-level and instruction-level parallelism through its novel design. First, it employs a novel dynamic data-driven orchestration mechanism using programmable Finite State Machines (FSMs). These FSMs are programmed at compile time to encode high-level dataflow per state and translate incoming meta-information (e.g., sparse coordinates) into control instructions at runtime. Second, Canon introduces a time-lapsed SIMD execution in which instructions are issued across a row of processing elements over several cycles, creating a staggered pipelined execution. These innovations amortize control overhead, allowing dynamic instruction changes while constructing a continuously evolving dataflow that maximizes parallelism. Experimental evaluation shows that Canon delivers high performance across diverse data-agnostic and data-driven kernels while achieving efficiency comparable to specialized accelerators, yet retaining the flexibility of a general-purpose architecture.
Keywords: Dataflow Architectures, Sparse Accelerators
††cc-license: by
1. Introduction
An ideal processor would allocate nearly all its resources to computation while minimizing the cost of control and data movement. However, the end of Dennard scaling, the slowdown of Moore’s law, and the disparate scaling of memory relative to logic have constrained the performance and efficiency gains of classical von Neumann architectures, moving them away from the ideal processor envisioned (Horowitz, 2014; Wang and Kim, 2021). As these architectures increasingly devote resources to control and data movement, their computational efficiency decreases. Against this backdrop, the rise of domain-specific compute-intensive applications has triggered a Cambrian explosion of novel, non–von Neumann accelerator architectures.
These domain-specific architectures incorporate specialized compute units and manage data dependencies through hardwired datapaths that mimic the application’s intrinsic data flow (Arvind and Nikhil, 1990). This hardwiring reduces the cost of control and memory access relative to the computation. Essentially, these architectures rely on the fabrication-time orchestration or configuration of the compute and data dependencies. Examples include Tensor Processing Units (TPUs)(Jouppi et al., 2023), AI accelerators(Chen et al., 2017; You et al., 2023; Lu et al., 2021), media and protocol accelerators (Karandikar et al., 2021), and sparse tensor accelerators (Muñoz-Martínez et al., 2023; Qin et al., 2020; Zhang et al., 2021; Dangi et al., 2024), each designed solely for the respective workloads. However, when tasked with workloads beyond their intended domain, these architectures exhibit extreme fragility in performance (Sankaralingam et al., 2003).
In contrast, programmable architectures, such as Coarse-Grained Reconfigurable Arrays (CGRAs) and FPGAs, rely on sophisticated mapping, placement, and routing software to orchestrate computation on their reconfigurable fabrics. By spatially distributing computation and communication at compile time, they achieve flexibility compared to specialized accelerators.
GPUs, on the other hand, leverage an execution model with massive thread-level parallelism, relying on compilers and schedulers to manage computation. While they offer more adaptability than fixed-function accelerators, their efficiency hinges on structured and regular workload decomposition and inherent parallelism.
Irregularity is becoming an increasingly critical factor in modern workloads. For instance, sparse tensor operations in machine learning (ML) workloads bring irregularities with wide-ranging sparsity from 5% to 95%, and can appear in structured or unstructured forms, either known at compile time or determined at runtime. Supporting a broad range of sparse kernels has become essential (Yuan et al., 2025; Beltagy et al., 2020; Zaheer et al., 2020).
Ultimately, GPUs, FPGAs, and CGRAs perform well on regular or data-parallel tasks but are less efficient for workloads with irregular dataflow and memory access patterns. While these architectures generally handle workload variations better than specialized accelerators, the compile-time orchestration and reliance on massive thread level parallelism can lead to performance degradation when faced with dynamic or unpredictable data patterns. This emphasises the need for a hybrid approach that integrates static and dynamic decision-making to handle an assortment of regular and irregular workloads with minimal resource overhead.
Contributions:
We propose Canon11
1
Canon in music stands for imitation with an offset, or a guiding principle., a novel parallel architecture that transcends traditional specialization-flexibility tradeoffs.
Our objective is to push the boundaries of programmable architectures, aligning with the idea that extreme domain specialization may often be superfluous (Nowatzki et al., 2017b).
As shown in Figure 1, Canon is based on a 2D-mesh spatial architecture composed of Processing Elements (PEs). Unlike conventional reconfigurable architectures that rely exclusively on compile-time orchestration, Canon exploits a two-tier approach. Canon first leverages inherent workload regularities, specifically, data-level and instruction-level parallelism, to schedule predictable high-level dataflows; and then uses dynamic scheduling in hardware via a lightweight programmable orchestrator to handle irregularities. Therefore, the cost of dynamic scheduling and control is minimized by confining it to the irregular aspects of the workload (e.g., arbitrary input patterns), while the bulk of the execution benefits from the efficiency of regular dataflows. The orchestrator incorporates a FSM which acts as an on-the-fly data-to-instruction translator. This FSM is programmed by the compiler, which relies on static analysis of the high-level dataflow and compute organization; and at runtime, the FSM relies on input-data and neighbor messages as triggers for generating instructions.
Second, Canon incorporates a time-lapsed SIMD execution combined with distributed memories, where instructions propagate through PEs over multiple cycles, amortizing control cost and enhancing scalability. While different PEs may be at various stages of execution at an instant, they eventually perform the same operation over time. Consequently, Canon exploits an evolving dataflow across the fabric, where execution patterns are constructed, switched, and adapted over time at fine granularity to suit an unpredictable input without sacrificing parallelism.
Control and synchronization are completely abstracted from the compute units in the PE array by resorting to orchestrators and issuing instructions in a time-lapsed manner. This abstraction enables a priori look-ahead into decisions, yielding predictable and deterministic behavior across the fabric, even under dynamic orchestration. The hardware sustains high parallelism, maximizes utilization, balances workload efficiently, and ultimately achieves consistently high throughput across diverse kernels and input data patterns.
Canon matches the performance of dense, unstructured and structured sparse accelerators in their own specialization domains with minimal efficiency degradation while also supporting a broad array of other parallel workloads typically handled by reconfigurable architectures. To our knowledge, Canon is the first architecture to sustain such high performance across such a diverse set of data-agnostic and data-driven kernels.
Figure 1. Canon Hardware Architecture
2. Canon Architecture
Canon is designed to effectively handle both regular workloads and data irregularities, with the primary intention of ensuring a stable performance and minimal fragility.
This section provides an overview of the architecture’s design principles that combine dynamic orchestration with a scalable reconfigurable fabric composed of PEs in a 2D mesh topology with a time-lapsed SIMD execution. Each PE has a vector lane for computation, associated registers, a router for communication with neighboring PEs, and a local data memory. The detailed micro-architectural implementation and mapping are further discussed in later sections.
Data-Driven Orchestration:
Figure 2 illustrates the mechanism where each row of processing elements is managed by a dedicated orchestrator, which is a lightweight, programmable finite-state machine. A bitstream configures the FSM with states representing high-level operational modes (e.g., computing multiplication, sending data to neighborhood PEs, or accumulating partial sums). The FSM dynamically issues instructions to its row of PEs reacting to input meta-data (e.g., sparse coordinates) and messages from neighbors if required. For instance, in Figure 2, both the rows are initially issued instruction 2 (i​n​s​t​2)(inst2) corresponding to State S2S_{2}; subsequently, a message from the orchestrator at the North to South triggers the second row’s transition from State S2S_{2} to S1S_{1}, changing its output instruction from i​n​s​t​2inst2 to i​n​s​t​1inst1. This dynamic orchestration, which is a hybrid of compile-time mapping with runtime decision making, enables the architecture to adapt seamlessly to both regular and irregular input data patterns.
Figure 2. Orchestration and Instruction issue in Canon
Time-Lapsed SIMD Execution:
As depicted in Figure 3, the architecture employs a time-lapsed SIMD execution model wherein instructions generated by the FSM-based orchestrator propagate through the PE array over multiple cycles via a dedicated instruction network in a staggered manner. Unlike conventional SIMD execution, where a single instruction is broadcast simultaneously to all PEs, here an instruction such as “multiply inputs from SRAM and East; Send Output South” is issued to the first PE in cycle 1, then traverses a 3-cycle pipeline before reaching the second PE in cycle 4. This staggered instruction issue ensures that while different PEs can behave differently at a given timestamp, they ultimately execute an identical sequence of operations on their respective data. The behavior, including NoC and memory actions, is replicated across the fabric. For instance, in Figure 3, the first columns’ compute, memory, and NoC behavior are recreated three cycles later by the next columns.
Figure 3. Time-lapsed SIMD with staggered instruction issue
2.1. Reduced Control Cost
An important issue with traditional von Neumann and many reconfigurable architectures is the high overhead of control logic (Wang and Kim, 2021; Li et al., 2024). In Canon, orchestrators provide a lightweight control mechanism, reducing the per-PE control burden. They generate and distribute control signals via an instruction-dedicated NoC from the periphery of a PE row through staggered instruction issue.
By offloading control and instruction distribution, we preserve a lightweight compute fabric, enhance scalability, simplify the programming model, and achieve high energy efficiency.
Synchronization: Each cycle, the orchestrator dispatches an instruction to the first PE of the row, which executes it and subsequently passes it along to the next PE. Consequently, every PE in a row ultimately performs the same instruction albeit at staggered cycles and on distinct data. Each PE operates with a fixed pipeline latency of 3 cycles, ensuring that the sequence of actions initiated by the first PE (including data exchanges and memory accesses) is consistently replicated by subsequent PEs with a delay corresponding to the instruction propagation. This predictable behavior enables us to abstract inter-PE synchronization through orchestrator-level coordination. This also means effectively enhancing the compute-to-control ratio, maximizing computational density, and reducing control overhead.
Abstracted & Deterministic Irregularity Handling:
The orchestrator is primarily designed to manage dynamic input variations, such as sparsity, by effectively addressing the challenges posed by irregular workloads and dynamic data dependencies. While CPUs and GPUs resolve such dependencies through memories, dataflow architectures depend largely on the NoC for data movement. In regular applications with predictable communication patterns, static routing via circuit-switched or hardwired NoCs is effective. However, for complex applications characterized by irregularities and variable data dependencies, packet-switched or dynamic NoCs are preferable due to their adaptability, despite incurring additional hardware overhead from mechanisms such as backpressure and virtual channels (Zhang et al., 2019a; Jerger et al., 2017; Zhang et al., 2019b).
We design a dynamically managed circuit-switching scheme that handles both regular and irregular workloads with minimal overhead. Thanks to deterministic timing across the PE array from abstracted synchronization, runtime control and congestion management within the PE’s NoC become unnecessary. The orchestrators manage irregularities externally, using their insight into PE determinism and input data patterns to make dynamic decisions. These decisions are embedded in the instruction stream, ensuring that the circuit-switched configurations accurately reflect the required data dependencies during execution.
2.2. Reduced Data-Handling Costs
Canon employs a distributed memory system in which each PE features local memory and communicates via the NoC. The orchestrators dynamically configure both the NoC and the memory through instructions, to efficiently support regular and irregular workloads. Although circuit-switch NoCs are highly efficient in data movement (Jerger et al., 2017; Horowitz, 2014), their fixed topology and limited bandwidth constrain their ability to manage complex dependencies, necessitating reliance on memory.
Canon prioritizes the NoC for mapping inherently regular compute patterns and data transfers, while it opportunistically resorts to memory when handling irregularity. In this design, memory serves a dual purpose and is partitioned respectively into two segments to prevent port saturation and minimize fragmentation: a larger segment for static data (e.g., ML weights) and a smaller scratchpad that serves as a read/write buffer to handle complex dependencies on the fly. Both segments support single-cycle random access.
As a storage device, the static memory (named data memory in the figures and texts below for simplicity) is mainly used for input and output data, enabling effective data reuse, reducing off-chip bandwidth requirements, and accommodating random accesses, particularly beneficial for irregular workloads with runtime-determined patterns. For re
