Catastrophic Forgetting Resilient One-Shot Incremental Federated Learning
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I Introduction
II Related Work
II-1 Federated Learning (FL)
II-2 One Shot Federated Learning (OSFL) [19]
II-3 Incremental Federated Learning (IFL)
III Preliminaries
III-A Incremental Federated Learning
III-B Diffusion Models
IV System Design: One-Shot Incremental Federated Learning
V Experimental Setup
V-1 Datasets
V-2 Hyperparameters
V-3 Baselines
VI Results and Analysis
VI-1 Main Results
VI-2 Ablation Study
VI-3 Number of Clients
VI-4 Computation and Communication Cost
VII Conclusion
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17625v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026
Catastrophic Forgetting Resilient One-Shot Incremental Federated LearningThanks: This work was partially supported by the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation via the WASP NEST project “Intelligent Cloud Robotics for Real-Time Manipulation at Scale.” The computations and data handling essential to our research were enabled by the supercomputing resource Berzelius provided by the National Supercomputer Centre at Linköping University and the gracious support of the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.
Obaidullah Zaland, Zulfiqar Ahmad Khan, and Monowar Bhuyan
Affiliation: Department of Computing Science,
Umeå University,
Umeå, SE-90187, Sweden,
E-mail: {ozaland, zakhan, monowar}@cs.umu.se
Affiliation:
Abstract
Modern big-data systems generate massive, heterogeneous, and geographically dispersed streams that are large-scale and privacy-sensitive, making centralization challenging. While federated learning (FL) provides a privacy-enhancing training mechanism, it assumes a static data flow and learns a collaborative model over multiple rounds, making learning with incremental data challenging in limited-communication scenarios. This paper presents One-Shot Incremental Federated Learning (OSI-FL), the first FL framework that addresses the dual challenges of communication overhead and catastrophic forgetting. OSI-FL communicates category-specific embeddings, devised by a frozen vision-language model (VLM) from each client in a single communication round, which a pre-trained diffusion model at the server uses to synthesize new data similar to the client’s data distribution. The synthesized samples are used on the server for training. However, two challenges still persist: i) tasks arriving incrementally need to retrain the global model, and ii) as future tasks arrive, retraining the model introduces catastrophic forgetting. To this end, we augment training with Selective Sample Retention (SSR), which identifies and retains the top-p most informative samples per category and task pair based on sample loss. SSR bounds forgetting by ensuring that representative retained samples are incorporated into training in further iterations. The experimental results indicate that OSI-FL outperforms baselines, including traditional and one-shot FL approaches, in both class-incremental and domain-incremental scenarios across three benchmark datasets.
Index Terms:
Federated learning, One-Shot Federated Learning, Incremental Federated Learning, Generative Data Replay
I Introduction
(a) FedAvg
(b) OSCAR-IL
Fig. 1: Motivation behind OSI-FL. One-shot FL approaches degrade in performance similar to traditional FL approaches as tasks arrive incrementally, specially when the tasks differ significantly.
Conventional machine learning (ML) training involves data centralization, which, at big-data scale, often becomes infeasible as datasets grow and span institutions, raising concerns about data ownership, privacy, and regulatory compliance [1]. Federated learning (FL) [2] extends the traditional machine learning (ML) paradigm to enable data storage at the source, while training a global model that captures knowledge across clients, usually through exchanging model updates. FL has thus found potential applications in various domains from healthcare [3] to autonomous vehicles [4], due to its privacy-enhancing and ownership-preserving qualities. Despite its benefits, FL assumes that the data distribution remains static across clients, and new data will not be introduced, which violates real-world settings where data flow is continuous [5]. For instance, in medical diagnosis, datasets are continuously updated [6]. The continuous flow of data, especially when the distributions of arriving tasks differ significantly (e.g. Figure 2), affects the global model performance in traditional FL algorithms (see Figure 1).
Fig. 2: T-SNE data visualization for multiple tasks, where each task contains a subset of the total classes, in an incremental FL setup (NICO Common dataset). As depicted, the distribution of data varies significantly among tasks, and as these tasks arrive incremetnally, learning the most recent task affects the knowledge about previous tasks (catastrophic forgetting).
Incremental federated learning (IFL) [7] has been introduced to bridge the gap in traditional FL by continuously learning the global model and adapting it to dynamic data flows at clients. IFL schemes introduce regularization [8], fine-tuning [9], or replay buffers [10] to mitigate the data distribution shift. Incremental FL frameworks, however, face two significant challenges [11]: i) high communication costs, since each distribution shift involves transmitting model gradients and updates across clients, and ii) catastrophic forgetting, where the global model’s performance deteriorates on earlier tasks, and the global model adapts to the new task data. Current approaches, such as selective retraining [12], elastic weight consolidation (EWC) [8], and data replay [5, 10], while reducing the impact of catastrophic forgetting, overlook the communication costs incurred by constant client-server communication.
Recently, generative model-assisted one-shot federated learning (OSFL) has attracted increasing research interest [13], which leverages the generative power of pre-trained diffusion models (DMs) to reduce communication costs in FL, specifically limiting global communication to a single round between clients and the server. Current approaches utilize prompt engineering [13], data encoding [14], or federated diffusion model training [15] to synthesize new data that is similar to clients’ data distributions at the server using pretrained DMs. The global model is then trained on synthesized data generated by the DM. However, in line with existing research in traditional FL, OSFL approaches neglect the continual, dynamic nature of clients’ data and assume it is static at the time of training a global model.
To address the limitations of both IFL and OSFL approaches, this work introduces One-Shot Incremental Federated Learning (OSI-FL), the first framework to integrate the incremental update process into a one-shot learning framework, thereby reducing communication cost to a single round per client. OSI-FL incorporates client-level category-specific data encodings, generated by a vision-language model (VLM) at the client to incrementally synthesize new data at the server using a classifier-free diffusion model (DM), inspired by OSCAR [14], effectively mimicking the data distribution at the client. The data generation pipeline for the single-shot communication is similar to OSCAR. However, the description generator and the text encoder have been replaced with their lightweight counterparts to reduce the burden on individual clients. Due to the smaller size of data encodings and a single communication round for each client, OSI-FL significantly reduces the communication load for each client compared to traditional FL and incremental FL approaches.
Furthermore, to reduce
