URL: https://arxiv.org/html/2602.17215v1
Status: 200
NotebookRAG: Retrieving Multiple Notebooks to Augment the Generation of EDA Notebooks for Crowd-Wisdom
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related Work
2.1 Computational notebook
2.2 Automating EDA
2.3 Insight Generation from Visualizations
3 Formative Study
3.1 Procedure
3.2 Design Requirements
4 NotebookRAG
4.1 Pipeline Overview
4.2 Notebook Retrieval
4.2.1 Component Extraction
4.2.2 Component Metadata Annotation
4.2.3 Intent-Guided Retrieval
4.2.4 Component Enhancement
4.3 Notebook Generation
4.4 Implementation
5 Case Study
6 User Study
6.1 Datasets & Materials
6.2 Study Design
6.3 Methods
6.4 Participants
6.5 Results
7 Discussion and Conclusion
Acknowledgements
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2602.17215v1 [cs.HC] 19 Feb 2026
\onlineid
9367
\vgtccategoryResearch
\vgtcinsertpkg
NotebookRAG: Retrieving Multiple Notebooks to Augment the Generation of EDA Notebooks for Crowd-Wisdom
Yi Shan1
††thanks: E-mail: ydan24@m.fudan.edu.cn
Yixuan He1
Zekai Shao1
Kai Xu2
††thanks: E-mail: kai.xu@nottingham.ac.uk
Siming Chen1
††thanks: E-mail: simingchen@fudan.edu.cn. Corresponding author.
Affiliation: 1Fudan University, China
2University of Nottingham, UK
Revised Theoretically, this approach better leverages the strengths of visualizations in revealing patterns; however, our current evaluation is limited to a small-scale manual review and is not yet comprehensive. We acknowledge that this pipeline may introduce a potential confirmation bias, as the statistical verification is performed based on the insights initially proposed by the VLM. In future work, we plan to address this limitation by exploring alternative designs, such as generating and comparing multiple competing hypotheses from the same visualization or explicitly incorporating falsification-oriented statistical tests. We also aim to conduct a more systematic evaluation of how this two-stage reasoning process influences both reliability and interpretability.
Abstract
High-quality exploratory data analysis (EDA) is essential in the data science pipeline, but remains highly dependent on analysts’ expertise and effort.
While recent LLM-based approaches partially reduce this burden, they struggle to generate effective analysis plans and appropriate insights and visualizations when user intent is abstract.
Meanwhile, a vast collection of analysis notebooks produced across platforms and organizations contains rich analytical knowledge that can potentially guide automated EDA.
Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) provides a natural way t
