E Formal Algorithm for Protocol 2
F Training Details for Protocol 2
License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
arXiv:2602.17223v1 [cs.CR] 19 Feb 2026
Privacy-Preserving Mechanisms Enable Cheap Verifiable Inference of LLMs
Arka Pal1
††thanks: Correspondence to: arka@ritual.net
Louai Zahran
Affiliation: Ritual
William Gvozdjak
Affiliation: Ritual
Affiliation: MIT
Akilesh Potti
Affiliation: Ritual
Micah Goldblum
Affiliation: Ritual
Affiliation: Columbia University
Abstract
As large language models (LLMs) continue to grow in size, fewer users are able to host and run models locally. This has led to increased use of third-party hosting services. However, in this setting, there is a lack of guarantees on the computation performed by the inference provider. For example, a dishonest provider may replace an expensive large model with a cheaper-to-run weaker model and return the results from the weaker model to the user. Existing tools to verify inference typically rely on methods from cryptography such as zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs), but these add significant computational overhead, and remain infeasible for use for large models. In this work, we develop a new insight – that given a method for performing private LLM inference, one can obtain forms of verified inference at marginal extra cost. Specifically, we propose two new protocols which leverage privacy-preserving LLM inference in order to provide guarantees over the inference that was carried out. Our approaches are cheap, requiring the addition of a few extra tokens of computation, and have little to no downstream impact. As the fastest privacy-preserving inference methods are typically faster than ZK methods, the proposed protocols also improve verification runtime. Our work provides novel insights into the connections between privacy and verifiability in LLM inference. We open-source our code at https://github.com/louai-ritual/priveri.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have increased significantly in size over the last few years. Recent models achieving cutting-edge performance (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Qwen et al., 2025; Team et al., 2025), for example, now often contain hundreds of billions of parameters. The hardware requirements to run these models are often too high for individuals, or even organizations, to run on their own, leading to a significant growth in demand for third-party LLM inference providers. However, this trend raises critical concerns about the integrity and trustworthiness of the services provided, particularly in the growing decentralized inference space. In this setting, any entity with surplus computational resources can offer to complete computational tasks, such as LLM inference, for another user. As the providers in this setting are often not subject to strict vetting, it is imperative to ensure that the service paid for is actually one that is performed by the provider.
Traditionally, the verification of outsourced computation has been addressed through cryptographic methods, such as zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs). Although offering strong theoretical guarantees, these methods often introduce substantial computational overhead for either the prover (the inference provider) or the verifier (the user), or both. Despite significant progress in recent years, the state-of-the-art for ZK verification of LLM inference remains thousands of times slower than vanilla inference (Sun et al., 2024), rendering it infeasible for large models, which are particularly likely to be in demand for third-party inference provision.
A related concern for third-party compute provision is that of privacy-preservation. Performing LLM inference for another party requires the user to share their prompts, resulting in a loss of privacy. Therefore, a seemingly orthogonal line of work in recent years has focused on privacy-preserving computation. These include methods such as secure multi-party computation (SMPC) and fully homomorphic encryption (FHE).
Our work examines the question: if a privacy mechanism is already in use, can this be leveraged to provide verification of the LLM inference computation as well? We answer this question in the affirmative; specifically, we propose two simple but novel protocols that use privacy to obtain differing levels of verification guarantees. We examine the costs and security properties of each of these protocols. Although our protocols have limitations and do not offer identical guarantees to those of ZK, we show that they are robust to many varieties of attacks. Moreover, we demonstrate that our ‘logit fingerprinting with noise’ protocol run with an SMPC method, SIGMA (Gupta et al., 2023), is ∼15×\sim 15\times faster than the state-of-the-art ZK method for proof of LLM inference on a single forward pass of Llama-2-7B (Touvron et al., 2023). We further hope that connecting privacy and verification for LLM inference will spur the creation of improved protocols and further research in this area; to this end, we also open-source an implementation of our Protocol 1 using the CrypTen library at https://github.com/louai-ritual/priveri.
Figure 1: Schema of Protocol 1, which allows a user to verify that a specified model MM was run on their prompt by a third party inference provider. The user adds sentinel tokens in random positions to the original prompt tokens, along with an altered attention mask. The position of these sentinel tokens is obfuscated to the inference provider by the privacy-preserving mechanism. The user can therefore perform verification against a precomputed cache of the sentinel token logits, effectively ensuring that model substitution attacks cannot occur.
2 Background & Related Work
Privacy-preserving inference. There are four main families of privacy-preserving LLM inference methods that have been proposed in the literature: SMPC (Secure Multi-Party Computation), FHE (Fully Homomorphic Encryption), TEEs (Trusted Execution Environments), and statistical methods. SMPC and FHE are general privacy-preserving computation methods which provide strong guarantees on computational indistinguishability of the inputs. Both methods add significant overhead to plaintext computation; for SMPC, a large component of this is communication between the multiple parties involved. Recently, both SMPC (Huang et al., 2022; Hao et al., 2022; Pang et al., 2023; Akimoto et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023) and FHE (Moon et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024) have been applied to LLM inference. Our protocols are agnostic to the exact method used, though differing attacks are possible with each choice of privacy mechanism. For a more detailed account of these methods, see Section A.1.
Verifiable inference. Zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs) are a class of methods that allows one party, the prover, to prove to another party, the verifier, that a statement is true, without revealing any additional information beyond the proof itself. ZK methods have recently been applied to proving LLM inference, such as in Sun et al. (2024); Qu et al. (2025). However, these approaches have significant overhead, and remain thousands of times slower than vanilla inference. By contrast, recent work has introduced ‘statistical’ methods for verifiable LLM inference, where the guarantees are relaxed in order to reduce the overhead added. For a more detailed account of these methods, see Section A.2.
Connections between privacy and verification. The connection between privacy and verification has not been extensively studied previously. Perhaps the closest work is MPC-in-the-Head (Ishai et al., 2007), which introduced a zero-knowledge verification protocol by utilizing any SMPC protocol. The protocol comes with steep costs for both the prover and verifier. For example, the prover must not only locally simulate every party in the underlying MPC execution but also repeat the computation multiple times. On the verifier’s end, the party must perform several confirmation tasks, including recomputing opened views, consistency checks, and typically engage in multiple rounds of checking to achieve acceptable soundness. The crucial distinction of our suggested protocols to MPC-in-the-Head is that we use the privacy scheme directly to encode inexpensive secrets that are easily verifiable. To the best of our knowledge, there has not previously been any work that specifically examines the relationship between privacy-preserving LLM inference and verifiable inference of LLMs in this way.
3 Threat Model
We consider a setting with two primary roles: the user, who also acts as the verifier, and an inference provider, who also acts as the prover. The user wishes to run inference with a model MM on their prompts xx, but cannot do so themselves due to e.g. lack of computational resources. They therefore request the inference provider to perform inference on xx with MM. The inference provider is untrusted and may act as an adversary without behavioral constraints; other external adversaries are out of scope. We assume the use of a privacy-preserving mechanism providing computational indistinguishability of the inputs to ensure that the inference provider cannot view xx. The model weights are assumed to be public. Our security goal is verifiability – that is, ensuring that the output the inference provider returns to the user can be verified as being the correct forward pass on the requested model on the given privatized prompt.
4 Protocol 1: Logit Fingerprinting
Our first proposal for obtaining verification cheaply given access to a privacy-preserving method of LLM inference is logit fingerprinting. We hypothesize that the logit vector returned by performing a forward pass on any set of tokens on modern LLMs is a highly unique ‘fingerprint’ of the model. Our proposed protocol leverages this property to provide inference verification as follows (see Figure 1):
1.
First, the user inserts KK sentinel tokens into the tokenized prompt, at random positions within the prompt. Call these positions p1,p2,…,pKp_{1},p_{2},...,p_{K}. These KK tokens are taken randomly from a public cache CC, consisting of many such length KK sequences.
2.
Next, the user creates the 2D attention mask to be used by the LLM by taking their desired attention mask (e.g., lower triangular for decoder-only LLMs) and inserting rows and columns as follows.
•
Add a row at pip_{i} that is 0 everywhere except positions pj​∀j≤ip_{j}\,\forall\,j\leq i, where it is set to 1.
•
Add a column at pip_{i} that is 0 everywhere except positions pj​∀j≥ip_{j}\,\forall\,j\geq i, where it is set to 1.
3.
The attention mask and augmented tokenized prompt are given to the inference provider under a privacy-preserving scheme, and the inference provider carries out a forward pass, and returns the output logit vector at all token positions to the user.
4.
The user verifies that the sentinel token logits match against the precomputed cached logits for that specific model.
The construction of the attention mask is such that t
