Guarding the Middle: Protecting Intermediate Representations in Federated Split Learning
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
I Introduction
II Related Work
III Preliminaries
III-A Differential Privacy
Definition 1 (ϵ\epsilon-DP) [26]:
Definition 2 ((ϵ,δ)(\epsilon,\delta)-DP) [27]:
Defintion 3((ϵ,δ)(\epsilon,\delta)-DP [28]) with Normal Distribution):
IV KD-UFSL: K-Anonymized Differentially Private U-shaped Federated Learning
IV-A Threat Model
IV-B Privacy Framework
IV-B1 Differential Privacy (DP)
IV-B2 K-Annonymity
V Implementation Details
V-A Datasets
V-B Model Training and Hyperparameters
V-C Baselines
V-D Metrics
Mean squared error (MSE):
Structural similarity index (SSIM) [32]:
VI Results and Analysis
VI-A Main Results
VI-B Visual Invertibility
VI-C Utility Discussion
VI-D Impact of σ2\sigma^{2} and k
VI-E Impact of Head Network Depth
VI-F Number of Clients
VII Conclusion
References
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17614v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026
Guarding the Middle: Protecting Intermediate Representations in Federated Split LearningThanks: This work was partially supported by the Wallenberg AI, Autonomous Systems and Software Program (WASP) funded by the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation via the WASP NEST project “Intelligent Cloud Robotics for Real-Time Manipulation at Scale.” The computations and data handling essential to our research were enabled by the supercomputing resource Berzelius provided by the National Supercomputer Centre at Linköping University and the gracious support of the Knut and Alice Wallenberg Foundation.
Obaidullah Zaland1,
Sajib Mistry3 , and Monowar Bhuyan1
Affiliation:
Affiliation: 1Department of Computing Science,
Umeå Unviersity, Umeå, SE-90187, Sweden
Emails: {ozaland, monowar}@cs.umu.se
Affiliation: 3Curtin University, Bentley WA 6102, Australia
Email:
sajib.mistry@curtin.edu.au
Affiliation:
Abstract
Big data scenarios, where massive, heterogeneous datasets are distributed across clients, demand scalable, privacy-preserving learning methods. Federated learning (FL) enables decentralized training of machine learning (ML) models across clients without data centralization. Decentralized training, however, introduces a computational burden on client devices. U-shaped federated split learning (UFSL) offloads a fraction of the client computation to the server while keeping both data and labels on the clients’ side. However, the intermediate representations (i.e., smashed data) shared by clients with the server are prone to exposing clients’ private data. To reduce exposure of client data through intermediate data representations, this work proposes k-anonymous differentially private UFSL (KD-UFSL), which leverages privacy-enhancing techniques such as microaggregation and differential privacy to minimize data leakage from the smashed data transferred to the server. We first demonstrate that an adversary can access private client data from intermediate representations via a data-reconstruction attack, and then present a privacy-enhancing solution, KD-UFSL, to mitigate this risk. Our experiments indicate that, alongside increasing the mean squared error between the actual and reconstructed images by up to 50% in some cases, KD-UFSL also decreases the structural similarity between them by up to 40% on four benchmarking datasets. More importantly, KD-UFSL improves privacy while preserving the utility of the global model. This highlights its suitability for large-scale big data applications where privacy and utility must be balanced.
Index Terms: Federated learning, Federated Split Learning, Privacy for Federated Learning, Data Reconstruction Attack
I Introduction
Edge applications, where massive and heterogeneous datasets are generated across clients, have increased interest in on-device data-driven decision-making [1]. Alongside the development of enhanced data privacy and regulatory frameworks [2], decentralized machine learning (DML) techniques have garnered significant attention over the past decade. Federated learning (FL) has emerged as a decentralized training paradigm for machine learning (ML) models, where multiple clients collaborate to train a common global model [3, 4]. Unlike centralized ML training, FL clients retain their data locally, thereby enhancing data privacy and ownership. An alternative DML approach, split learning (SL) [5], distributes the model training across a client and a server by model partitioning, while keeping the data at the source. In SL, the initial model layers — and sometimes the last layers — are typically trained on the client (the data source), and training the rest of the model is offloaded to a more powerful server, which further highlights its relevance for large-scale big data applications.
Federated split learning (FSL) [6] has recently been explored as a combination of the two decentralized training methodologies. FSL distributes the training across clients and the server in an FL setup to reduce the computational burden on clients while adhering to the integral principle of FL (i.e., local data storage). Two-way federated split learning (TFSL) [7] divides the training model into two parts. The initial part is trained on the client, while the latter is trained on the server. In a typical TFSL setup, the clients train the initial portion of the model and send the intermediate features (i.e., smashed data)11
1
In the rest of this paper, smashed data, intermediate client representations, and intermediate features are used interchangeably. to the server, where the latter portion of the network is trained. The gradients for the latter part are propagated at the server and then sent to the client for completion of the backward step. TFSL, however, suffers from two major issues: i) Clients need to share their labels with the server, which is infeasible under strict data privacy and ownership principles [8], and ii) Intermediary features may cause data leakage in the existence of an adversary [9], who with some knowledge can reconstruct the private client data form the smashed data representations sent to the server.
Figure 1: The clients’ data on the top, and reconstructed data from the client’s smashed data at the bottom.
U-shape federated split learning (UFSL) [5, 10] solves the first problem with TFSL by dividing the training model into three parts, where the first and last portions reside on the client, and the middle part resides at the server. While UFSL solves the label localization problem, it remains susceptible to data leakage from the intermediate smashed data [11] shared among clients. In the existence of a curious server with very little information, the client’s local data can be reconstructed. Figure 1 shows the actual and reconstructed data from the smashed data by a curious server. While there exists minimal literature on privacy for federated split learning, existing studies mostly explore the effects of differential privacy(DP) [10] and the choice of the cut layer (the last layer for the client model) to improve smashed data privacy [9]. The choice of cut layer has a significant impact on the division of computational load between the client and server. While a deeper client network might preserve better privacy, it defeats the computationally efficient purpose of FSL for the client. DP, on the other hand, can improve privacy by adding noise to raw data, but can still be susceptible to data reconstruction attacks if ϵ\epsilon is higher. The effects of k-anonymity, especially micro-aggregation, have not been explored, either individually or in combination with differential privacy, on privacy in FSL.
This work aims to provide a UFSL approach with enhanced privacy and thus presents k-anonymized differentially private federated U-shaped split learning 
