URL: https://arxiv.org/html/2602.17483v1
Status: 200
3.1. Approach
We empirically audit how confidently and accurately popular LLMs output personal data by building on the WikiMem probing framework (Staufer, 2025) and adapting it to black-box audits and HCI.
In essence, WikiMem tests whether a model associates a person hh (e.g., Harry Potter) with a value vv (e.g., Hogwarts) for a human-related property pp (e.g., residence).
Figure 1. Overview of our feature selection process. Starting from all 5824 human-related Wikidata properties, we only use those for which WikiData has entries for at least 100 individuals (the original WikiMem Dataset). We first taxonomize properties into high-level buckets, then filter for properties that are broadly relevant, heterogeneous, and expressible in one to three words, and finally re-categorize the selected properties into eight user-facing feature groups, resulting in the 50 features used in our study.A left-to-right flow diagram. On the left, a box shows ``5824 Human-Related Wikidata Properties'' and below it ``243 Properties with Wikidata entries for at least 100 individuals (WikiMem dataset)''. An arrow leads to Step~1, ``Taxonomize'', which groups properties into Core Identity, Personal Life, Professional Life, Broader Cultural Context, and Other Sensitive Information, with examples such as demographics, familial relationships, occupation and awards received, ancestral home and culture, and medical conditions or convictions. Another arrow leads to Step~2, ``Filter'', listing three criteria: relevant to most users, captures heterogeneity across categories, and can be expressed in one to three words. A further arrow leads to Step~3, ``Re-Categorize'', which organizes the remaining properties into eight feature groups: Demographic Information, Names and Titles, Origins and Geography, Physical Characteristics, Professional Life, Family and Relationships, Events and Interests, and High Sensitivity. A final arrow points to a box labeled ``50 Features'' with example features such as date of birth, pseudonym, country of citizenship, eye color, field of work, father's name, awards received, and blood type.
Following WikiMem, we inherit its formalization of personal data as any factual association (h,p,v)(h,p,v) that it has learned with sufficient fidelity to be recoverable through inference. To test whether a model has memorized a human–fact association22
2
When probing LLMs for these associations, one must account for confounds that may influence whether we are measuring knowledge, plausible inference, or arbitrary generation. We carefully consider and discuss this possibility throughout the paper., we use canaries—short natural-language sentences that assert (h,p,v)(h,p,v) in varied forms—from the WikiMem dataset. WikiMem provides >5,000 canaries covering 243 human-related properties from Wikidata and offers both deterministic and paraphrastic variants so that results are not an artifact of a single prompt wording. This canary variation is important because small changes in phrasing or writing style strongly influence model outputs (Hase et al., 2023; Schlangen, 2020; Vázquez et al., 2024).
From the 11 canaries per property in WikiMem, we manually select up to five low-ambiguity variants for each of the 50 properties tested (see Figure 2 for an example and A.2 for a full list). These 50 features were selected because they (a) represent a broad range of categories (e.g., personal life, professional life, core identity), (b) could be relevant to a broad set of users, and (c) could be described in 1-3 words, a necessary condition for the user-facing aspects of the tool. For a visual overview of this selection process, see Figure 1.
⬇
1
"P551": {
2
"label": "residence",
3
"description": "the place where the person is or has been resident",
4
"canaries": ["HUMAN_SUBJECT’s residence is PROTECTED_ATTRIBUTE.",
5
"HUMAN_SUBJECT lives in PROTECTED_ATTRIBUTE",
6
"HUMAN_SUBJECT’s domicile is PROTECTED_ATTRIBUTE",
7
"HUMAN_SUBJECT is based in PROTECTED_ATTRIBUTE", ...]
8
}
Figure 2. Example of a WikiMem canary template for the property residence (P551).
It shows the property label, description, and several paraphrased sentence variants used to test
whether an LLM memorizes human-residence associations.JSON snippet illustrating a Wikidata property template for residence (P551).
It defines the label “residence,” provides a short description, and lists example canary sentence variants,
such as “HUMAN_SUBJECT’s residence is PROTECTED_ATTRIBUTE,” “HUMAN_SUBJECT lives in PROTECTED_ATTRIBUTE,”
and similar paraphrases used to probe LLM memorization.
Figure 3 shows the auditing process of WikiMem, which we adopt in our work. For each canary template, it scores the value vv by computing the token-level negative log-likelihood (NLL), a standard measure of how “surprising” a string is to the model: lower NLL means the model finds the value more likely in context. It then compares the NLL of ground truths (e.g., “Hogwarts” for hh=“Harry Potter” on property P551 residence) against those of type-consistent counterfactuals sampled from Wikidata (e.g., “Spain”). In our prefix-based setup for black-box APIs, we only reveal the first two characters/digits of values and construct prefix counterfactuals procedurally (see §3.2). These prefix counterfactuals play the same role as WikiMem’s value-level counterfactuals–competing completions for vv.
Figure 3. Overview of the original WikiMem probing framework. Paraphrased canary sentences are paired with Wikidata ground truths and type-consistent counterfactuals (e.g., “Hogwarts” vs. “Spain” for Harry Potter’s residence). The model’s negative log-likelihood (NLL) scores are calibrated against generic-subject and similar-name baselines, then ranked to decide whether a fact is memorized (boolean) and to compute association strength (numeric).Flow diagram of the WikiMem auditing pipeline. On the left, canary paraphrases are combined with Wikidata ground truths and counterfactuals. In the middle, the model’s negative log-likelihood scores are computed and calibrated with baselines. On the right, results are ranked to determine whether ground truths are memorized and to output an association strength value.
Memorization Scoring. We adopt WikiMem’s generic-subject baseline by replacing hh with an uninformative subject (e.g., “This person’s residence is”) and using the difference in NLL to reduce priors (e.g., a model’s bias towards “Hogwarts”). With this baseline in place, we can determine ho
