Greedy Multi-Path Block Verification for Faster Decoding in Speculative Sampling
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Background
2.1 Single-Path
Speculative sampling.
Draft extensions.
Tree verification.
Block verification (BV).
2.2 Multi-Path
OTLP-based algorithms.
Traversal verification.
3 Single-Path Information-Agnostic LP
4 Multi-Path Information Agnostic LP
5 Greedy Multi-Path Block Verification
6 Experiments
6.1 Other Model Families and Datasets
6.2 Temperature Ablations
6.3 Draft Length Ablations
6.4 Comparison to Multi-Path Methods
7 Conclusion
References
A Proof of Multi-Path Information-Agnostic LP
B Proof of Single-Path Information-Agnostic LP
C Proof of Block Verification Optimality
D Proof of Path Selection Decomposition
E Proof of Skewed Draft Distribution Feasibility
F Proof of Optimal Multi-Path Algorithm Description
G Proof of Optimal Multi-Path Lower Bound
H Greedy Polymatroid Connection
I Other Model Families and Datasets
J Temperature Ablations
K Draft Length Ablations
L Multi-Path Comparison
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.16961v1 [cs.IT] 18 Feb 2026
Greedy Multi-Path Block Verification for Faster Decoding in Speculative Sampling
Rahul Thomas
Affiliation: Ritual
Affiliation: Columbia University
Correspondence to: rahulkrishnathomas@gmail.com
Arka Pal
Affiliation: Ritual
Abstract
The goal of LL-step speculative decoding is to accelerate autoregressive decoding of a target model by using a cheaper draft model to generate a candidate path of LL tokens. Based on a verification algorithm involving target and draft model probabilities, a prefix of the candidate sequence is accepted, and an additional correction token is sampled from a residual distribution to ensure that the final output adheres to the target distribution. While standard speculative decoding uses a verification algorithm which is independent at each token on the path, a recent extension called block verification uses a joint condition involving all sampled on-path probabilities. Block verification (BV) was shown to be optimal over all verification algorithms which use only on-path probabilities, improving on standard speculative decoding. In this work, we first show that block verification is optimal even over verification algorithms that use off-path probabilities, by constructing an information-agnostic linear program (LP). Further, we can extend our LP to the setting where the draft model samples multiple candidate paths, and use it to construct a natural class of multi-path block verification generalizations. While computing the optimal algorithm in this class is not tractable, by considering a stricter class of greedy algorithms, we can formulate an efficient method called greedy multi-path block verification (GBV). Empirically, GBV can improve block efficiency by over 30% and reduce decoding walltimes by over 15% relative to BV. On Llama-3 70B, GBV can improve the end-to-end decoding throughput over SOTA multi-path verification methods by more than 15%.
Keywords: Machine Learning, ICML
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) achieve strong results across code, language, and reasoning (Zhu et al., 2024; Kasneci et al., 2023; Thirunavukarasu et al., 2023). Most LLM families, such as Qwen (Bai et al., 2023), GPT (Radford et al., 2018; Radford et al., 2019; Brown et al., 2020; OpenAI, 2023), and Llama (Touvron et al., 2023b; Touvron et al., 2023a) employ autoregressive decoding. When inference is performed with these transformer-based architectures on GPUs, end-to-end latency is dominated by memory bandwidth rather than compute (Fu et al., 2024).
Speculative sampling (Chen et al., 2023; Leviathan et al., 2023) aims to reduce such punitive costs when sampling from a large target model. This procedure autoregressively decodes a candidate sequence from a cheaper draft model, performs a target model forward pass over the candidate sequence to obtain target distribution values, and then alters the sequence through a randomized verification algorithm so that the resulting output matches the target model distribution. As inference is bandwidth-bound, the target forward pass over the candidate sequence has negligible overhead over a standard forward pass. Thus, speculative sampling decodes multiple tokens per target model call and speeds up inference without impacting downstream performance.
In standard speculative sampling, the draft model proposes a length LL draft block, and the verification algorithm independently accepts or rejects each token based on target and draft model distributions values along the bock. The longest prefix with no rejections is chosen, and an additional token is sampled from a residual distribution, ensuring that at least one token is always generated. While this procedure significantly improves decoding efficiency, it suffers when early tokens have low acceptance. If the first token is almost always rejected due to a poor draft suggestion, then even if subsequent tokens are always accepted, there is no speedup.
To overcome this early-token bottleneck, recent work on block verification (BV) (Sun et al., 2024b) replaces independent token-wise verification with independent prefix-wise verification, and selects the longest accepted prefix. An additional token is still sampled, but the residual distribution is altered to ensure the output still matches the target distribution. This ensures that more tokens can be accepted when earlier tokens are likely to be rejected. Block verification is empirically 5-8% faster than standard speculative sampling. In fact, it is provably optimal over all verification algorithms that only use target and draft probability distributions along the draft block, including standard speculative sampling.
In this paper, we frame the optimal verification algorithm as a solution to a linear program (LP), and extend the LP to the setting of multiple i.i.d. generated draft sequences. Our contributions are as follows.
•
Single-Path Information-Agnostic LP. We develop an LP that encodes feasible speedups from verification algorithms that must still return a candidate sequence prefix and an additional token, but are now given access to the full joint target and draft distributions, not just on-path values. We show that bl
