URL: https://arxiv.org/html/2602.17254v1
Status: 200
Trivance: Latency-Optimal AllReduce by Shortcutting Multiport Networks
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract.
1 Introduction
2 Model and Preliminaries
2.1 Latency, Bandwidth & Congestion
2.2 AllReduce as a Collective Operation
2.3 Optimality for DD-dimensional torus networks for Latency and Bandwidth
2.4 State-of-the-art Algorithms
Hamiltonian Rings and Bucket:
Recursive Doubling:
Swing:
Bruck:
Bidirectional Design of Swing, Recursive Doubling and Bucket:
3 Motivation
3.1 Problems of Existing Approaches
3.2 Exploration of Design Space
4 Trivance
4.1 Bandwidth-Optimal Algorithm
4.2 Latency-Optimal Algorithm
Proof of Latency-Optimality for Trivance
4.3 Communication Pattern
4.4 Generalizing to Arbitrary Network Sizes
5 Multidimensional Tori
6 Evaluation
6.1 Performance on Rings
6.2 Performance on 2D Tori
Bandwidth Impact on Completion Time:
Performance on Power-of-Three Tori
6.3 Performance on 3D Tori
6.4 Summary
7 Discussion
Implementation Feasibility
Applicability to Other Collectives and Topologies
Latency-Optimality in Multidimensional Tori
8 Related Work
9 Conclusion
References
A Latency-Optimality Proof for Trivance
B Calculations of Transmission delay bounds
B.1 For Ring Networks
B.2 For Multidimensional Torus
License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
arXiv:2602.17254v1 [cs.DC] 19 Feb 2026
Trivance: Latency-Optimal AllReduce by
Shortcutting Multiport Networks
Anton Jürß
Affiliation: Weizenbaum Institute & TU Berlin, Germany
,
Vamsi Addanki
Affiliation: Purdue University, USA
and
Stefan Schmid
Affiliation: TU Berlin & Weizenbaum Institute, Germany
Abstract.
AllReduce is a fundamental collective operation in distributed computing and a key performance bottleneck for large-scale training and inference. Its completion time is determined by the number of communication steps, which dominates latency-sensitive workloads, and the communication distance affecting both latency- and bandwidth-bound regimes. Direct-connect topologies, such as torus networks used in Google’s TPUv4, are particularly prone to large communication distances due to limited bisection bandwidth.
Latency-optimal algorithms such as Bruck’s complete AllReduce in log3⁡n\log_{3}n steps on a bidirectional ring, but incur large communication distances that result in substantial congestion. In contrast, recent approaches such as Swing reduce communication distance and congestion, but are inherently required to perform log2⁡n\log_{2}n steps to complete AllReduce, sacrificing latency-optimality.
In this paper, we present Trivance, a novel AllReduce algorithm that completes within log3⁡n\log_{3}n steps, while reducing congestion compared to Bruck’s algorithm by a factor of three and preserving bandwidth-optimality. Trivance exploits both transmission ports of a bidirectional ring within each step to triple the communication distance along both directions simultaneously. Furthermore, by performing joint reductions, Trivance improves both the number of steps and network congestion. We 
