https://arxiv.org/html/2602.17097v1
B.2 Language Model
The LLM component of AudioChat totals to 3.6B parameters. It has 39 Transformer (Vaswani et al., 2017) decoder layers, each with a hidden size of 2304 and an MLP size of 9216. The model uses a vocabulary size of 256K with the weight tying between the LM head and input text embeddings. The first 26 decoder layers and the LM-head/text embedding weights are initialized from the 2.6B version of Gemma 2 (Gemma Team et al., 2024). We use the version that is only pre-trained on language modeling and is not instruction fine-tuned. A simple linear projection layer is used to map the 256-dim outputs of audio tokenizer to the Transformer’s 2304 hidden size. Similarly, the diffusion head maps the 2304-dim Transformer output back to the 256-dim audio tokenizer space. We specifically use the vv-pred formulation of diffusion training (Salimans & Ho, 2022).
As mentioned in Section 4.2, our design shares similarities to BAGEL (Deng et al., 2025). However, there are several key differences:
1.
BAGEL uses three representations input representations per image: semantic tokens, clean VAE tokens, and noised VAE tokens. The latter is only used for diffusion training. These representations are concatenated along the time axis, leading to very long sequence lengths. AudioChat only uses noised VAE tokens for training input. During inference, the model uses clean VAE tokens for tasks requiring audio conditioning.
2.
BAGEL uses the MoT architecture (Liang et al., 2025) by cloning the original LLM parameters. One set of parameters is used for understanding tasks, receiving semantic tokens as input. The other set of parameters is used for generation tasks, receiving VAE tokens as input. These two task-specific towers run in parallel, with the only cross-modal interaction occuring in the self-attention calculation. This is visualized in Figure 6 in our single tokenizer implementation of MoT. In comparison, the SCT uses a cascaded structure across modalities - understanding followed by generation. Not only is this more flexible, as the generation layers do not have to perfectly mirror the understanding layers, it is also more efficient. During text generation inference, only the understanding layers are activated.
While our initial experiments began with the MoT, we found that it performs poorly on interleaved generation tasks. As mentioned in Section 5.4, we attribute this to the weak cross-modal alignment mechanisms of MoT.
Figure 6: Overview of the MoT architecture.
Appendix C Training Settings
C.1 Training Data
ASR/TTS: We use the same datasets for ASR and TTS, which total to 100K hours of English-only audio. Our data is mostly obtained from public sources, which are LibriLight (Kahn et al., 2020) and Common Voice (Ardila et al., 2020).
AC/T2A: We use the same datasets for audio captioning and text-to-audio, which total to 10K hours of non-speech data. 2K hours are obtained from Freesound, with music and non-commerical data filtered out. The remaining 8K hours are from internal and commercially-licensed datasets.
TextLM: To prevent the model from forgetting world knowledge learned from text, we perform continual text pre-training. We use the mid-training corpus from OLmO 2 (OLMo et al., 2024), which consists of high-quality documents for text langua
