Human-level 3D shape perception emerges from multi-view learning
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
References
1 Supplementary Material
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17650v1 [cs.CV] 19 Feb 2026
Human-level 3D shape perception emerges from multi-view learning
Tyler Bonnen
††thanks: Corresponding author: bonnen@berkeley.edu
Affiliation: University of California, Berkeley
Jitendra Malik
Affiliation: University of California, Berkeley
Angjoo Kanazawa
Affiliation: University of California, Berkeley
Humans can infer the three-dimensional structure of objects from two-dimensional visual inputs. Modeling this ability has been a longstanding goal for the science and engineering of visual intelligence, yet decades of computational methods have fallen short of human performance. Here we develop a modeling framework that predicts human 3D shape inferences for arbitrary objects, directly from experimental stimuli. We achieve this with a novel class of neural networks trained using a visual-spatial objective over naturalistic sensory data; given a set of images taken from different locations within a natural scene, these models learn to predict spatial information related to these images, such as camera location and visual depth, without relying on any object-related inductive biases. Notably, these visual-spatial signals are analogous to sensory cues readily available to humans. We design a zero-shot evaluation approach to determine the performance of these ‘multi-view’ models on a well established 3D perception task, then compare model and human behavior. Our modeling framework is the first to match human accuracy on 3D shape inferences, even without task-specific training or fine-tuning. Remarkably, independent readouts of model responses predict fine-grained measures of human behavior, including error patterns and reaction times, revealing a natural correspondence between model dynamics and human perception. Taken together, our findings indicate that human-level 3D perception can emerge from a simple, scalable learning objective over naturalistic visual-spatial data. All code, human behavioral data, and experimental stimuli needed to reproduce our findings can be found on our project page.
Introduction
How do humans perceive the three-dimensional structure of objects? Cognitive scientists have assembled a rich body of empirical evidence to understand this visual ability. 3D shape inferences appear to rely on multiple visual processes that emerge early in infancy, yet still require years to fully develop (Todd, 2004; Yonas et al., 1987; Van Den Boomen et al., 2012). This developmental process has been well characterized (Piaget and Inhelder, 1948; Gibson, 1969), with recent work revealing the statistical structure of infants’ natural experience: children have dense, visually diverse experiences with a relatively small number of objects and environments (Smith et al., 2018; Long et al., 2024), alongside rich multi-modal signals including depth from stereopsis and self-motion from the vestibular system (Angelaki and Cullen, 2008; Campos et al., 2000). While the sensory data and behavioral milestones typical for developing children are well characterized, the learning principles underlying 3D perception are not. One prominent hypothesis is that object perception emerges from general purpose learning mechanisms over these multi-sensory data distributions (Von Helmholtz, 1867; Kersten et al., 2004) while others have argued that object-related inductive biases are necessary for learning (Spelke, 1990). A longstanding goal within the cognitive sciences has been to design models that embody such hypotheses and evaluate them alongside human behavior (Cao and Yamins, 2024). However, existing models have not achieved human-level 3D perception (Bowers et al., 2023; Bonnen et al., 2024), limiting our ability to formally evaluate these cognitive theories.
Here we develop a modeling framework that, for the first time, matches human performance on 3D perception tasks for arbitrary objects. We begin with a novel class of neural networks trained using visual and spatial information analogous to natural visual experience, including images, depth, and self-motion cues. These models learn via a conceptually simple and scalable learning objective: given a set of images captured from different locations within a scene, predict spatial information associated with each image, such as their relative locations or visual depth. This approach formulates perception as a correspondence problem, in which inferring image content is entangled with inferring spatial information; this is a stark contrast to prevailing modeling approaches within the cognitive sciences, which formulate vision as a feature extraction problem, and leverage powerful models trained on images sampled from unrelated environments. Critically, these visual-spatial models can be trained without any object-related inductive biases in the model architecture or learning objective (Wang et al., 2025a). As such, this modeling strategy embodies longstanding theories within the cognitive sciences that visual perception can emerge from general-purpose learning mechanisms operating over natural sensory experience (Smith and Gasser, 2005). Here we determine whether this approach achieves human-level 3D shape inferences by adapting these models for experimental tasks, then evaluating whether model responses predict human behavior.
To evaluate the alignment between humans and these ‘multi-view’ vision models we leverage a perceptual task that requires zero-shot inferences about 3D shape. In this task, a single object is presented from two different viewpoints alongside a second object (i.e., images A, A’, B) and participants must identify the non-matching object (B) using only visual information available in these three images. We develop a model evaluation framework that enables us to estimate their zero-shot performance on this task; we do not train models using this experimental setup, nor do we utilize any experimental stimuli/data for fine-tuning or training linear decoders. Instead, we leverage a confidence-based readout that is built into the model’s training objective. While prior work reveals a considerable gap between humans and existing vision models (Bonnen et al., 2024; Bowers et al., 2023), we substantially outperform prior models and match human-level accuracy. We develop complementary zero-shot analyses and demonstrate that independent model readouts predict human-like error patterns and reaction times—measures that have been the cornerstone of cognitive theories for decades. These findings reveal an emergent correspondence between multi-view models and human perception, indicating that human-level 3D shape inferences can emerge from a simple multi-view learning objective applied to naturalistic visual data.
Methods
Multi-view vision models
We evaluate a series of multi-view vision transformers including DUST3R (Wang et al., 2024), MAST3R (Leroy et al., 2024), Pi3 (Wang et al., 2025b), and VGGT-1B (Wang et al., 2025a). These models have been trained on large-scale, multi-view, naturalistic scene data (e.g., Ling et al., 2024); these models receive sets of images depicting the same scene from different viewpoints and must learn to predict related spatial information, including camera location, visual depth, and correspondence (Fig. 1 left). The training signals used in this modeling approach are analogous to information that is available to humans through stereo vision, tactile feedback, and proprioception. Notably, VGGT uses a generic transformer architecture (Dosovitskiy, 2020) with no hand-coded geometric priors. As such, any understanding of 3D structure emerges from learning the predictive rel
