Retrospective In-Context Learning for Temporal Credit Assignment with Large Language Models
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related Works
3 Preliminary
4 Retrospective In-Context Learning for Temporal Credit Assignment
4.1 LLMs as Policies
4.2 Implementation Details
4.3 Retrospective In-Context Learning
5 Retrospective In-Context Online Learning
5.1 Policy Improvement based on RICL
5.2 Pipeline of RICOL
6 Experiments
6.1 Environments
6.2 Sample Efficiency of RICL in Credit Assignment (RQ1)
6.3 RICL Enables More Reliable In-Context Updates via Retrospective Design (RQ2)
6.4 Benchmarking RICOL (RQ3)
6.5 RICOL Benefits from Credit Assignment (RQ3)
6.6 RICOL is Robust to Noisy Verbal Feedback (RQ2)
7 Conclusion
8 Acknowledgement
References
A Derivation of the Loss Function
B Proof of Theorem
C Related Works
D Comparison of Training Times
E Environments
E.1 1D Key-Door Environment
E.2 BabyAI Environment
F PPO Implementation Details
G RICL can Identify Critical States in Sequential Decision-Making
H Comparisons between Retroformer and RICOL
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17497v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026
Retrospective In-Context Learning for Temporal Credit Assignment with Large Language Models
Wen-Tse Chen
Affiliation: Carnegie Mellon University
Jiayu Chen
Affiliation: The University of Hong Kong
Fahim Tajwar
Affiliation: Carnegie Mellon University
Hao Zhu
Affiliation: Stanford University
Xintong Duan
Affiliation: Carnegie Mellon University
Ruslan Salakhutdinov Jeff Schneider
Affiliation: Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
Learning from self-sampled data and sparse environmental feedback remains a fundamental challenge in training self-evolving agents. Temporal credit assignment mitigates this issue by transforming sparse feedback into dense supervision signals. However, previous approaches typically depend on learning task-specific value functions for credit assignment, which suffer from poor sample efficiency and limited generalization. In this work, we propose to leverage pretrained knowledge from large language models (LLMs) to transform sparse rewards into dense training signals (i.e., the advantage function) through retrospective in-context learning (RICL).
We further propose an online learning framework, RICOL, which iteratively refines the policy based on the credit assignment results from RICL. We empirically demonstrate that RICL can accurately estimate the advantage function with limited samples and effectively identify critical states in the environment for temporal credit assignment. Extended evaluation on four BabyAI scenarios show that RICOL achieves comparable convergent performance with traditional online RL algorithms with significantly higher sample efficiency.
Our findings highlight the potential of leveraging LLMs for temporal credit assignment, paving the way for more sample-efficient and generalizable RL paradigms.
1 Introduction
Online learning with LLMs, guided by self-generated data and environmental feedback, offers a promising research direction for advancing beyond the constraints of demonstration (Dong et al., 2024). However, this task is inherently difficult because valuable environmental feedback is often sparse (Andrychowicz et al., 2017; Sukhbaatar et al., 2017). This challenge is particularly evident in multi-turn settings, where agents must execute a sequence of correct actions to receive a reward signal. Sparse environmental feedback increases both the sample complexity and the instability of the learning process (Chaudhari et al., 2024; Cao et al., 2024). In this work, we explore effective temporal credit assignment methods to convert sparse feedback into dense training signals based on a creative use of LLMs, enabling the identification of critical states and actions in the environment and facilitating more efficient online learning (of LLM agents).
In particular, we adopt LLMs as policies and update them using a novel Retrospective In-Context Learning (RICL) algorithm. RICL is designed specifically for multi-turn setting. At each turn (i.e., environment time step), RICL first analyze environmental feedback (i.e., reward signals) by leveraging the pretrained knowledge of an LLM reflector, then incorporate this analysis into the prompt to perform an in-context update of the LLM policy. Further, we introduce a novel paradigm to estimate the advantage function of an LLM policy by utilizing the log-probabilities of both the original policy and its in-context updated version. This process is theoretically grounded, and our experiments demonstrate that it can accurately estimate the advantage function with high sample efficiency. In this way, we transform sparse reward signals into advantage functions, which are dense training signals facilitating both temporal credit assignment and policy training. These improvements stem from the pretrained knowledge in LLMs and our new approach to estimating advantage functions using LLMs.
Further, we introduce RICOL, a novel online learning framework for LLMs that iteratively refines the policy based on the credit assignment results from RICL. Leveraging the accurate credit assignment performed by RICL and the strong generalization ability of LLMs, RICOL is significantly more sample-efficient than traditional online RL methods across multiple language-conditioned, sparse-reward sequential decision-making tasks. This demonstrates the potential of our algorithm to enable LLMs to self-improve through online learning.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows: (1) We propose RICL for temporal credit assignment, which transforms sparse reward signals into advantage functions by comparing the log-probabilities of LLM policies before and after an in-context update. (2) We propose RICOL, an online learning framework that uses advantage weighted regression to incorporate credit assignment results (i.e., advantage functions) from RICL into the LLMs’ parameters. This integration enables LLM agents to self-improve based on sparse environmental feedback. (3) Empirical results demonstrate the effectiveness of RICL in temporal credit assignment and the efficacy and efficiency of RICOL in iterative policy improvement. Altogether, RICL and RICOL represent a more sample-efficient and generalizable RL paradigm for LLM agents.
2 Related Works
Intrinsic Self-Correction: In recent studies, LLMs have demonstrated advanced capabilities in self-verifying generated responses and correcting potential issues through in-context learning (Madaan et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2023). However, critiques have suggested that intrinsic self-correction, in the absence of ground truth environment feedback, may not always enhance and could potentially degrade performance of LLMs (Huang et al., 2023; Olausson et al., 2023; Valmeekam et al., 2023). In contrast, our focus is on learning from environmental feedback, a challenging task due to its sparse and complex nature.
Self-Correction based on an Extra Reflector Network: Another line of research aims to improve the self-correction capability of LLMs by fine-tuning it on an external dataset (Yao et al., 2023). It often requires to collect an additional dataset especially tailored for the training of a reflector network. For instance, Chen et al. (2024) design an erroneous solution rewriting task for reflector training. In contrast, we perform self-correction using free-form environmental feedback and do not need to train an extra network.
Self-Correction based on Induction: Prior work has explored encoding past experiences into text-form memory and incorporating this memory into prompts to enhance decision-making in subsequent trials (Shinn et al., 2024; Zhao et al., 2024; Zelikman et al., 2022). There is also a line of works leveraging LLMs to generate rewards – either as codes or natural language prompts – and iteratively refine these rewards based on environmental feedback through in-context learning (Ma et al., 2023; Kwon et al
