RetouchIQ: MLLM Agents for Instruction-Based Image Retouching with Generalist Reward
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related Work
2.1 Image Retouching
2.2 Generalist Reward in Reinforcement Learning
3 RetouchIQ
3.1 Overview
3.2 Data Preparation
3.3 Supervised Fine-Tuning Stage
3.4 Reinforcement Learning Stage
4 Generalist Reward Model
4.1 Overview
4.2 Data Preparation
4.3 Training
Supervised Fine-Tuning Stage.
Policy-Guided Reward Training (PGRT) in RL.
5 Experiments
5.1 Experiment Settings
Datasets.
5.2 Qualitative Comparisons
5.3 Quantitative Evaluation
5.4 The Role of Reward Model and PGRT
6 Conclusion
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2602.17558v1 [cs.CV] 19 Feb 2026
RetouchIQ: MLLM Agents for Instruction-Based Image Retouching with Generalist Reward
Qiucheng Wu
††thanks: This work was completed during Qiucheng’s internship at Adobe.
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Affiliation: UC, Santa Barbara
Jing Shi
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Simon Jenni
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Kushal Kafle
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Tianyu Wang
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Shiyu Chang
Affiliation: UC, Santa Barbara
Handong Zhao
††thanks: Project Lead.
Affiliation: Adobe Research
Abstract
Recent advances in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have shown great potential for extending vision-language reasoning to professional tool-based image editing, enabling intuitive and creative editing.
A promising direction is to use reinforcement learning (RL) to enable MLLMs to reason about and execute optimal tool-use plans within professional image-editing software. However, training remains challenging due to the lack of reliable, verifiable reward signals that can reflect the inherently subjective nature of creative editing.
In this work, we introduce RetouchIQ, a framework that performs instruction-based executable image editing through MLLM agents guided by a generalist reward model.
RetouchIQ interprets user-specified editing intentions and generates corresponding, executable image adjustments, bridging high-level aesthetic goals with precise parameter control.
To move beyond conventional, rule-based rewards that compute similarity against a fixed reference image using handcrafted metrics,
we propose a generalist reward model—an RL fine-tuned MLLM that evaluates edited results through a set of generated metrics on a case-by-case basis.
Then, the reward model provides scalar feedback through multimodal reasoning, enabling reinforcement learning with high-quality, instruction-consistent gradients.
We curate an extended dataset with 190k instruction-reasoning pairs and establish a new benchmark for instruction-based image editing. Experiments show that RetouchIQ substantially improves both semantic consistency and perceptual quality over previous MLLM-based and diffusion-based editing systems.
Our findings demonstrate the potential of generalist reward-driven MLLM agents as flexible, explainable, and executable assistants for professional image editing.
1 Introduction
The recent progress of multimodal large language models (MLLMs) has unlocked a vast landscape of applications that bridge visual understanding and linguistic reasoning. Beyond perception and captioning, MLLMs are now capable of acting as general-purpose agents that can invoke external tools, combining the broad reasoning capabilities of language models with the precision and domain expertise of specialized systems. Such MLLM agents have demonstrated their potential in a wide range of domains, from retrieval [37, 29] and image generation [38, 40, 18] to autonomous workflows [25, 26, 28, 8], showcasing an emerging paradigm of reasoning-driven tool use.
Among these applications, one particularly creative and artistically meaningful direction is to empower MLLM agents to interact with professional image editing software, such as Adobe Lightroom, PicsArt, and Claid AI studio [1, 31, 5].
However, mastering such software demands deep technical and creative expertise, posing a barrier for both casual users and professional photographers who may excel at capturing images but lack the specialized knowledge for effective retouching. Existing solutions [10, 22, 4] adopt various post-training strategies to equip MLLMs with tool-use capabilities, including reinforcement learning (RL) aimed at reproducing human-edited results. However, due to the inherently subjective nature of creative photo retouching, multiple edits can be equally good, and different users may produce distinct yet valid outcomes for the same request. Consequently, existing rule-based pixel-level rewards (See Figure 2) become unreliable when model training is anchored to a single reference edit.
To address this challenge, we introduce RetouchIQ, an MLLM-based agent that performs instruction-based executable image editing, converting user requests into interpretable reasoning and actionable steps. RetouchIQ leverages editing tools from professional image processing software to execute fine-grained parameter adjustments that align with natural language instructions (e.g., “create an epic, moody seascape, give a dramatic, cinematic intensity” as shown in Figure ).
Crucially, we introduce a generalist reward model (GRM), which is an RL fine-tuned MLLM that evaluates edited results with a series of generated metrics on a case-by-case basis.
To construct pairwise (strong/weak) data for RL training of the GRM, a natural approach is to generate weak edits via inverse-edit perturbations—using predefined tools and parameter offsets [7].
However, we find that this seemingly reasonable strategy yields sub-optimal performance due to a distribution shift between these synthetic weak edits and the real weak edits produced by the policy editing model. We further introduce a new training scheme (Policy-Guided Reward Training, PGRT) designed to align the data distributions of the policy editing model and the reward critic model, thereby yielding stronger and more stable performance.
Experiments show that RetouchIQ exhibits strong capabilities in producing aesthetically consistent, instruction-aligned, and publication-quality image edits. Compared with existing agent and diffusion-based editing systems, our framework offers better semantic consistency and perceptual quality, while providing explainable reasoning throughout the editing process. Our contributions are threefold:
•
We introduce RetouchIQ, the first framework to address the inherently subjective nature of image retouching by introducing a generalist reward model that provides flexible, context-aware supervision beyond conventional verifiable rewards.
•
We propose PGRT, a RL paradigm that leverages signals from the policy editing model itself to refine reward estimation and better capture nuanced perceptual differences between before- and after-edit images.
•
RetouchIQ demonstrates strong performance in both semantic alignment and perceptual quality, surpassing state-of-the-art general purpose MLLMs, MLLM agents and diffusion-based systems, and producing edits that closely approach professional-level retouching.
2 Related Work
2.1 Image Retouching
Image retouching aims to enhance visual appeal by adjusting tone, color, and illumination while preserving realism and semantic consistency.
Early works focused on learning to predict image editing operations to achieve aesthetically pleasing results [20, 19, 17, 30, 34].
While these methods provide step-wise and explainable editing procedures, these models typically have little or no capability to capture nuanced, user-specific goals, which prevents them from handling diverse textual instructions.
More recently, diffusion-based models [15, 35] have been explored for image enhancement and editing 
