The Role of the Availability Heuristic in Multiple-Choice Answering Behaviour
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Methodology
2.1 Determining Option Availability
Knowledge Corpora
Retrieving Passages
Assigning Passages
2.2 Distractors Generation Method
2.3 Manually Created Question Sets
3 Results
3.1 LLM-Generated Distractors
LLM-Perceived Difficulty
3.2 Robustness of the Availability Measure
In- and Out-of-Context Availability
Number of Retrieved Passages
3.3 Availability as a Guessing Strategy
4 Discussion
5 Limitations
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2602.17377v1 [cs.CL] 19 Feb 2026
The Role of the Availability Heuristic in Multiple-Choice Answering Behaviour
Leonidas Zotos
Affiliation: Center for Language and Cognition
Affiliation: Department of Experimental Psychology
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
E-mail {l.zotos, d.h.van.rijn, m.nissim}@rug.nl
Hedderik van Rijn
Affiliation: Department of Experimental Psychology
University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands
E-mail {l.zotos, d.h.van.rijn, m.nissim}@rug.nl
Malvina Nissim
Affiliation: Center for Language and Cognition
Abstract
When students are unsure of the correct answer to a multiple-choice question (MCQ), guessing is common practice. The availability heuristic, proposed by A. Tversky and D. Kahneman in 1973, suggests that the ease with which relevant instances come to mind, typically operationalised by the mere frequency of exposure, can offer a mental shortcut for problems in which the test-taker does not know the exact answer. Is simply choosing the option that comes most readily to mind a good strategy for answering MCQs? We propose a computational method of assessing the cognitive availability of MCQ options operationalised by concepts’ prevalence in large corpora. The key finding, across three large question sets, is that correct answers, independently of the question stem, are significantly more available than incorrect options. Specifically, using Wikipedia as the retrieval corpus, we find that always selecting the most available option leads to scores 13.5% to 32.9% above the random-guess baseline. We also find that LLM-generated MCQ options show similar patterns of availability compared to expert-created options, despite the LLMs’ frequentist nature and their training on large collections of textual data. Our findings suggest that availability should be considered in current and future computationally modelling student behaviour.
Keywords: Availability Heuristic Multiple-Choice Question Evaluation Information Retrieval
1 Introduction
During test-taking, examinees often use “test-wiseness strategies” of varying complexity to achieve a higher score [7]. For example, in the context of Multiple-Choice Questions (MCQs), examinees might quickly eliminate absurd options, or use an “umbrella term” strategy, by which they choose the option that encompasses all known correct options [6, 11]. In this work, we evaluate the “availability” heuristic as a test-wiseness strategy.
The availability heuristic, introduced by A. Tversky and D. Kahneman is a strategy by which the likelihood of an event is estimated based on the ease of cognitive retrieval of relevant memories or associations [12]. In the MCQ context, there can be differences in availability between the options. If we consider an MCQ with options “Paris”, “Tallinn” and “Antananarivo”, we expect that, for most test-takers, “Paris” has higher availability than the alternatives, as it is generally more prevalent in daily life independently of the specific question asked.
Figure 1: Overview of our approach of evaluating the out-of-context availability of an MCQ option. First, we compute the textual embedding of the combined MCQ options. Then, a pre-determined number of relevant passages are retrieved from one of two large corpora. Afterwards, the textual embedding of each option is computed separately. The per-option availability is finally determined by the proportion of retrieved passages that are most similar to each option.
We further make a distinction between in- and out-of-context availability: While the availability of “Paris” is high out-of-context, the availability of “Antananarivo” increases when conditioned on the question “Which of the following is an African capital?”. In other words, we can consider the availability of MCQ options with or without the question stem. In this work, we propose an availability quantification methodology based on the prevalence of the content of each option in large text corpora 1. With this approach, in this work, we evaluate whether correct MCQ answers show higher availability compared to incorrect options (also known as distractors), therefore offering a useful test-wiseness strategy to test-takers. We are particularly interested in out-of-context availability, as it presents a stronger case for the availability heuristic as a useful test-wiseness strategy (see Section 3.2 for details). Henceforth, we refer to out-of-context availability simply as availability.
In recent times, various techniques leveraging Large Language Models (LLMs) have been proposed for the generation of MCQ distractors [2]. This is seemingly a low-hanging fruit, as these tools are widely accessible and the well-defined nature of the task lowers the barrier of entry for educators. At the same time, assessing the pedagogical quality of distractors is also an open field of research, proving to be a difficult task given the various aspects that influence their quality (e.g., lexical clarity, similarity between options etc.) [3]. For example, it has been found that LLM- and student-perceived difficulty correlates, offering an easily accessible means of MCQ evaluation [9, 16]. Given the frequentist nature of LLMs and their training regime using large collections of textual data, we analyse whether distractors generated by human experts and LLMs differ in terms of availability, therefore potentially offering an additional evaluation dimension for the quality of MCQ distractors. Finally, we analyse the availability of crowdsourced distractors as a middle ground between the efficiency of LLMs and the domain knowledge of human experts.
Concretely, our work is structured around three Research Questions:
RQ1
Do correct answers of MQs exhibit higher availability compared to distractors?
RQ2
Are high availability distractors more commonly selected by students compared to low availability distractors?
RQ3
Do machine-, crowd-, and expert-generated distractors exhibit differences in availability?
More broadly, given that most student simulation nowadays are based on models trained on large corpora, with this research we assess how the availability heuristic, as proxied by frequency, influences answer selection to MCQs.
2 Methodology
To tackle the outlined research questions, it is necessary to have an appropriate method of determining the availability of the MCQ options. To this end, we use a multi-step retrieval-based approach, described in Section 2.1. Furthermore, the human-curated question sets and the altered versions containing LLM-generated distractors are detailed in Sections 2.2 and 2.3, respectively.
2.1 Determining Option Availability
In the context of this research, we use the prevalence of a concept (i.e., an MCQ option) in large corpora as a signal of availability: We assume that frequently occurring concepts in the corpus correspond to higher cognitive availability for a test-taker. To operationalise this intuition, for a given MCQ, we retrieve a pre-determined number of relevant text passages from a large corpus and record how they are semantically distributed across the options of the MCQ. As a hypothetical example, for the question “What is the capital of France?” with options “Paris”, “Tallinn” and “Antananarivo”, we determine each option’s availability by its prevalence in a large corpus containing general knowledge.
Knowledge Corpora
As sources for the passage retrieval, we use the English Wikipedia [14] and BEIR, a large information retrieval dataset [10]. Using Wikipedia is a natural choice, as it contains large amounts of highly curated factual information. On the other hand, the passages in BEIR cover a much 
