SMAC: Score-Matched Actor-Critics for Robust Offline-to-Online Transfer
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Preliminaries
3 Problem statement
4 Experimental setup
4.1 Benchmarks
4.2 Offline-to-online Setup
5 Linear connectivity of offline and online maxima
6 Score Matched Actor-Critic (SMAC): regularizing Q-values with dataset scores
6.1 Estimating the dataset’s score
6.2 Regularizing the QQ-function with score matching
6.3 Using Muon as an optimizer
7 Experimental Results
8 Related works
9 Limitations & future work
10 Conclusion
11 Impact Statement
References
A Reinforcement Learning
B Value-based Reinforcement Learning
C Offline Reinforcement Learning
D Batch size and notions of sharpness matter in offline-to-online RL
E Ablating Reinforcement via Supervision in Offline-to-Online performance
F Verifying Score-Matching Identity Throughout Training
G Regret during online phase
H Sensitivity to κ\kappa
I How much does adding Muon matter?
J Diffusion Model Introduction, Training, and Hyper-parameters
J.1 Hyper-parameters
K SMAC Hyper-parameters
L Baselines
L.1 IQL
L.2 CalQL/CQL
L.3 TD3+BC
M Generating contour graphs of planes in parameter space
N Experimental Details
N.1 Benchmark Environments
N.2 A note on Offline-to-Online Specific Benchmarks
N.3 Evaluating CalQL vs CQL
O Algorithm Pseudocode
P SAC and PPO respect identity at Optima
P.1 SAC
P.2 PPO
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17632v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026
SMAC: Score-Matched Actor-Critics for Robust Offline-to-Online Transfer
Nathan S. de Lara
Affiliation: Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Affiliation: Vector Institute
Correspondence to: nathan.delara@mail.utoronto.ca
Florian Shkurti
Affiliation: Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Affiliation: Vector Institute
Abstract
Modern offline Reinforcement Learning (RL) methods find performant actor-critics, however, fine-tuning these actor-critics online with value-based RL algorithms typically causes immediate drops in performance.
We provide evidence consistent with the hypothesis that, in the loss landscape, offline maxima for prior algorithms and online maxima are separated by low-performance valleys that gradient-based fine-tuning traverses.
Following this, we present Score Matched Actor-Critic (SMAC), an offline RL method designed to learn actor–critics that transition to online value-based RL algorithms with no drop in performance. SMAC avoids valleys between offline and online maxima by regularizing the Q-function during the offline phase to respect a first-order derivative equality between the score of the policy and action-gradient of the Q-function.
We experimentally demonstrate that SMAC converges to offline maxima that are connected to better online maxima via paths with monotonically increasing reward found by first-order optimization.
SMAC achieves smooth transfer to Soft Actor-Critic and TD3 in 6/6 D4RL tasks. In 4/6 environments, it reduces regret by 34-58% over the best baseline.
Keywords: Machine Learning, Reinforcement Learning, Offline-to-Online RL, Offline Reinforcement Learning
1 Introduction
Fine-tuning actor–critics from offline RL checkpoints with online value-based methods often triggers an immediate drop in performance. We study why offline algorithms produce actor–critics that are brittle to such fine-tuning, through the lens of optimization landscape geometry. For offline RL to truly support a pre-train fine-tune paradigm, it should produce actor–critics that are both performant and able to readily learn from new data. Ideally, an offline RL algorithm should pre-train an actor-critic that can be fine-tuned by any online method without performance degradation. If this condition is satisfied, the usefulness of offline RL increases, as pre-trained actor-critics can be chained with the most data-efficient online algorithms to mimic the pre-train fine-tune paradigm common for large language models today.
Figure 1: Past offline RL methods converge to maxima separated from online optima by low-reward valleys. Top: reward landscapes on the Kitchen task for CalQL (left) and SMAC (right). Blue and checkered flags being the real locations of the pre-trained and fine-tuned checkpoints on the landscape respectively. The paths and red/yellow flag are illustrative annotations showing the hypothesized trajectory during transfer. Paths demonstrate the existence of a low reward valley between pre-trained and fine-tuned checkpoints when using CalQL. Our method SMAC has no such valleys and is on a unified hill with the fine-tuning checkpoint. Bottom: SMAC vs. CalQL performance in the Kitchen task. See Section 5 for analysis.
To prevent early fine-tuning drops, offline checkpoints should be adaptable: standard online actor–critic updates should not traverse low-reward regions of parameter space.
We formalize this via mode connectivity: two high-performing solutions are connected if some path between them has monotonically changing reward, and linearly connected if the straight line between maxima has monotonically changing reward
(Garipov et al., 2018; Frankle et al., 2020; Mirzadeh et al., 2020; Juneja et al., 2023). Popular offline RL methods rely on minimizing Q-values for out-of-distribution actions (Nakamoto et al., 2023; Kumar et al., 2020; Jin et al., 2022), or explicit policy constraints (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021; Kostrikov et al., 2022; Nair et al., 2020) which can misalign the offline objective with the online objective, making offline and online optima poorly connected. We hypothesize that this linear disconnection is an explanatory factor for initial drops in performance during fine-tuning.
In section 5, we empirically investigate this and find that several widely used offline RL methods converge to solutions that are not linearly connected to online Soft Actor Critic (SAC) (Haarnoja et al., 2018) optima by a line along which reward improves monotonically.
Figure 2: Increasing dataset size and coverage does not bridge offline-to-online gap. We generate rollouts in two environments with a policy that has a 0.7 success rate and plot the offline-to-online performance as we increase the dataset size. We observe that even when the dataset is so large that it is sufficient for learning optimal policies, the actor-critics found are still quickly unlearned by online fine-tuning.
Following this, we introduce Score Matched Actor-Critic (SMAC), which extends SAC with (i) a single critic regularizer, motivated by maximum-entropy RL (Haarnoja et al., 2017), that aligns the Q-function’s action-gradient ∇aQ​(s,a)\nabla_{a}Q(s,a) with the score of the dataset’s action distribution ∇a​log​π𝒟​(a|s)\nabla_{a}\log\pi^{\mathcal{D}}(a|s); and (ii) the Muon optimizer (Jordan, 2024), which Anonymous (2025) reported to favour flatter solutions than Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2017) a property often associated with improved pre-training checkpoints’ downstream transfer ability (Liu et al., 2023). Across our benchmarks, SMAC converges to offline maxima that are connected to online SAC maxima, supporting the view that connectivity explains offline-to-online transfer.
We demonstrate this smooth transfer property of SMAC across online RL algorithms, long-horizon tasks, sparse reward tasks, and high-dimensional tasks from the D4RL benchmark datasets (Fu et al., 2021). We show that SMAC robustly transfers to online fine-tuning with SAC, TD3 (Fujimoto et al., 2018), and TD3+BC (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021). In 4/6 tasks, SMAC pre-training followed by SAC fine-tuning reduces regret by 34–58% relative to the best baseline.
Our contributions are as follows:
•
We show that past offline RL methods exhibiting a performance drop when transitioned to online RL methods coincides with offline methods converging to solutions which are not linearly connected to the solutions that SAC fine-tuning them finds.
•
We provide an offline RL method that can smoothly transition to online RL algorithms for efficient online fine-tuning, outperforming fine-tuning state-of-the-art offline RL algorithms.
2 Preliminaries
We use the canonical Markov Decision Process (MDP) formulation of RL, which optimizes policies towards maximizing the future discounted sum of rewards. We give a detailed description of: RL, value-based RL, and offline RL in Appendices: A, B, and C. For notation we use ss for states, aa for actions, rr for rewards, π⁡(a|s)\pi(a|s) for policies, Q⁡(s,a)Q(s,a) for Q-functions, 𝒥⁡(π)\mathcal{J}(\pi) for the expected discounted reward running π\pi, and 𝒟={(si,ai,ri,si′)}i=1N\mathcal{D}=\{(s_{i},a_{i},r_{i},s^{\prime}_{i})\}_{i=1}^{N} for datasets.
The transition from offline pre-training to online fine-tuning causes the policy to explore out-of-distribution states and actions. This exacerbates problems that arise from making out-of-distribution Q-value predictions (Zhou et al., 2024; Nakamoto et al., 2023).
Previous approaches focus on either (i) methods for the entire offline-to-online process that learn Q-functions, which are not ”unlearned” upon transfer (Nakamoto et al., 2023; Wen et al., 2024); or (ii) policy regularization methods implemented in the online phase to stop the policy updates from causing a drop in performance (Dong et al., 2025a; Zhang et al., 2023a). TD3+BC (Fujimoto & Gu, 2021) is a simple example of (ii). TD3+BC is originally an offline RL algorithm but has been shown to achieve smooth transfer when fine-tuning offline agents by trading off the drop in performance during transfer for final performance (Dong et al., 2025b; Lee et al., 2021).
Local connectivity of maxima in our paper refers to the geometry of expected return 𝒥⁡(π)\mathcal{J}(\pi) as a function of policy parameters. Two maxima are linearly connected if reward changes monotonically along the line between them in parameter space. A slightly different notion of mode connectivity in supervised learning has been studied, where connectivity means that loss is convex between minima (Frankle et al., 2020). Frankle et al. (2020) observed that in supervised learning, networks trained from a shared
pre-training checkpoint often converge to linearly connected maxima. This
suggests that after sufficient pre-training, optimization moves within a
connected subspace rather than traversing disjoint basins. Further work in supervised learning by Juneja et al. (2023) show that maxima which are connected have similar generalization abilities.
Diffusion models estimate the score ∇x​log​p​(x)\nabla_{x}\log\,p(x) of a distribution p⁡(x)p(x) given only samples by learning to reverse a KK-step noising process. We detail how they are trained and give more specifics in Appendix J.
Diffusion models can be used for learning effective policies in continuous MDPs (Ajay et al., 202
