MeGU: Machine-Guided Unlearning with Target Feature Disentanglement
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related works
2.1 Machine unlearning
2.2 In-context Learning of Multi-modal large language models
3 Preliminaries
Problem setup
Unlearning via training with error-maximizing noise
4 Methodology
4.1 Perturbing labels generation
Transition matrix estimation
Assigning perturbing labels
The necessity of MLLM guidance for perturbing labels
4.2 Target feature disentanglement and finetuing
Feature noise generation
Model re-optimization
5 Experiments
5.1 Experimental setup
Evaluation metrics:
5.2 Main implementation results
Class-wise unlearning:
Sub-class unlearning:
Random unlearning:
Computation time:
6 Conclusion
Contributions:
Limitations:
References
A Algorithm of proposed MeGU
B Parameter settings for experiments
C Distribution of perturbing labels
D Comparison on visualized model prediction behavior after unlearning
E Sensitivity studies
F Ablation studies
G Supplementary experiments
Additional results of class-wise unlearning
Additional results of sub-class unlearning
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17088v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026
MeGU: Machine-Guided Unlearning with Target Feature Disentanglement
Haoyu Wang
Zhuo Huang
Affiliation: School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology;
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney;
Xiaolong Wang
Bo Han
Affiliation: Department of Computer Science, Hong Kong Baptist University
Zhiwei Lin
Tongliang Liu
Affiliation: School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology;
Sydney AI Centre, The University of Sydney;
Abstract
The growing concern over training data privacy has elevated the "Right to be Forgotten" into a critical requirement, thereby raising the demand for effective Machine Unlearning. However, existing unlearning approaches commonly suffer from a fundamental trade-off: aggressively erasing the influence of target data often degrades model utility on retained data, while conservative strategies leave residual target information intact.
In this work, the intrinsic representation properties learned during model pretraining are analyzed. It is demonstrated that semantic class concepts are entangled at the feature-pattern level, sharing associated features while preserving concept-specific discriminative components. This entanglement fundamentally limits the effectiveness of existing unlearning paradigms.
Motivated by this insight, we propose Machine-Guided Unlearning (MeGU), a novel framework that guides unlearning through concept-aware re-alignment. Specifically, Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) are leveraged to explicitly determine re-alignment directions for target samples by assigning semantically meaningful perturbing labels. To improve efficiency, inter-class conceptual similarities estimated by the MLLM are encoded into a lightweight transition matrix.
Furthermore, MeGU introduces a positive-negative feature noise pair to explicitly disentangle target concept influence. During finetuning, the negative noise suppresses target-specific feature patterns, while the positive noise reinforces remaining associated features and aligns them with perturbing concepts. This coordinated design enables selective disruption of target-specific representations while preserving shared semantic structures.
As a result, MeGU enables controlled and selective forgetting, effectively mitigating both under-unlearning and over-unlearning.
Extensive experiments across varying unlearning scenarios and diverse datasets demonstrate that MeGU consistently outperforms state-of-the-art baselines, achieving thorough target data removal while maintaining strong generalization performance on retained data.
A Preprint
1 Introduction
Machine Learning (ML), based on utilization of data resources, has been extensively explored in vast fields (Jordan and Mitchell, 2015; Lu and Weng, 2007; Nadkarni et al., 2011). However, studies (Jegorova et al., 2022; Fu et al., 2022) highlight the potential data security risks such as differential privacy (Dwork et al., 2014) and adversarial vulnerabilities (Steinhardt et al., 2017). Regulations (Voigt and Von dem Bussche, 2017; Bonta, 2022) have been introduced to address these concerns, where the "Right to be Forgotten" (Rosen, 2011) is underlined to enable deletion request from data providers to protect their privacy.
On the other hand, part of the information exposed to a model during the training phase is often time-sensitive or inherently unreliable, such as noisy labels. Eliminating the influence of such unreliable information on a deployed model without resorting to retraining constitutes another critical requirement for achieving trustworthy AI (Hine et al., 2024; Kang et al., 2025; Huang, 2025; Wang et al., 2024a; Li et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2024; Yuan et al., 2025).
To fulfill this target, an intuitive solution is to train a new model from scratch without target data. However, the substantial computation and time costs are simply unacceptable for practices.
Thereby, the Machine Unlearning (MU) is proposed to tackle this problem, whose objectives are: 1) Remove the influence of specific data while maintaining the overall generalization; 2) Cost less time and computational resources than simply retraining.
Prior researchers mainly explore two types of unlearning strategies: model-centric and data-centric approaches.
Model-centric methods directly modify model architectures or parameters through alternative training paradigms (Bourtoule et al., 2021; Yan et al., 2022) or influence estimation (Sekhari et al., 2021; Zhao et al., 2022). While data-centric approaches (Golatkar et al., 2020a; Shibata et al., 2021) utilize re-optimization (Golatkar et al., 2020a) or gradient updates (Wu et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2026) to align the unlearned model with the retrained model, called "gold model".
However, these approaches often face problems such as storage overhead and inaccurate unlearning.
Another line of works (Graves et al., 2021), such as UNSIR (Tarun et al., 2023), crave to leverage feature noises to enhance forgetting of target data during fine-tuning. However, empirical evidence suggests a trade-off between effectively eliminating the influence of target data and maintaining the overall generalization capability (Ye et al., 2021; Huang et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2025).
To address this challenge, we first investigate in a question: How does the unlearned data affect the retained model generalization? Existing research (Serra et al., 2018) indicates that models acquire two levels of cognition during pretraining: feature patterns directly extracted from data, and semantic concepts representing complex relations and combinations of different feature patterns, during pretraining. Prior study (Chang et al., 2024) interprets it as a mapping of features onto a higher-dimensional concepts space.
This explains the interleaved influence that unlearned data poses on the retained model generalization, as different semantic concepts could share certain amounts of patterns, hereby named as associated features, while they each have unique features to distinguish from others.
Figure 1 shows such an example. When unlearning one of the concept, the associated features between two concepts are restrained, harnessing the generalization on the retained concept. Such interplay underscores the nature of the trade-off challenge.
However, previous studies focus either on eliminating all related feature patterns of target concept (Tarun et al., 2023) or re-aligning the target concept with other retained concepts (Chen et al., 2023). The complex entanglement at the feature pattern level is neglected, leading to excessive or insufficient unlearning.
Figure 1: The entanglement among features from different concepts. Taking dinosaur and wolf as an example. They share similar features (marked as red) while each possesses unique features (green). Assume that dinosaur is the class to be forgotten. The goal of our method is to disentangle its features and forget the target concept’s unique features while preserving associated features shared with the other retained concepts.
In this paper, we propose Machine-Guided Unlearning (MeGU) as a framework to manipulate and enhance the unlearning process, as shown in Figure 2. Intuitively, MeGU aims to unlearn certain data by injecting misleading concepts to ensure learning a desired semantic gap from the target data. To achieve this, we leverage the guidance of zero-shot Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs) (Liu et al., 2024a; Huang et al., 2024) to generate perturbing labels for finetuning. The similarities between different concepts are based on the understanding of prompted MLLMs. We store such a similarity in a transition matrix, which facilitates efficient inference of subsequent instance-based feature understanding.
Furthermore, to address the problem of feature entanglement, we introduce the Fragment-Align strategy, which disentangles semantic concepts via a positive-negative feature noise pair Hong et al. (2024); Hong et al. (2022); Chen et al. (2025).
Specifically, the positive feature noise aims to align the target data representation with the semantics of the perturbing labels, while the negative feature noise disrupts the original representation associated with the true labels. Working together, these two complementary noises disentangle the target features from their original concepts and re-anchor them toward the perturbed concepts, enabling selective forgetting without harming overall generalization.
Through substantial studies on three unlearning tasks conducted on a range of datasets, the efficacy and efficiency of MeGU as an unlearning method are rigorously validated. Our contributions in this paper can be summarized into:
•
We investigate the intrinsic mechanisms underlying model generalization from a two-level cognitive perspective, namely feature patterns and semantic concepts. We further uncover the entangled interactions among different concepts, which give rise to the inherent trade-off challenges faced by existing unlearning approaches.
•
We propose MeGU, a novel framework that leverages MLLM guidance to explicitly manipulate the unlearning process. Building upon this framework, we introduce the Fragment-Align strategy to disentangle the influence of target data, thereby effectively alleviating the aforementioned trade-off. Moreover, we provide both theoretical analysis and empirical evidence to systematically differentiate MeGU from representative unlearning paradigms.
•
We conduct extensive evaluations across three distinct unlearning scenarios to rigorously assess the effectiveness of the proposed method. In addition, we perform comprehensive ablation and sensitivity studies to examine the contributions of individual components within the framework as well as the impact of key hyperparameter settings. Detailed analyses of experimental results are presented to substantiate our claims.
2 Related works
2.1 Machine unlearning
Existing Machine Unlearning (MU) approaches can be categorized into two branches: model-centric and data-centric unlearning. Model-centric unlearning endeavors to repurpose knowledge from pre-trained models by selectively modifying or filtering their components or parameters, such as Sharded, Isolated, Sliced, and Aggregated (SISA) training (Bourtoule et al., 2021). Researchers (Yan et al., 2022; Zhou et al., 2022; Brophy and Lowd, 2021) continue to improve the performance through techniques such as data preprocessing. However, isolated training of model components will lead to generalization degradation and additional costs for initial training and storage.
Model pruning (Zhao et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024b; Wang et al., 2022; Tanaka et al., 2020; Feldman, 2020; Stephenson et al., 2021), emerges to discard target data by selectively manipulating related crucial parameters (Yeom et al., 2021; Ma et al., 2021; Frankle and Carbin, 2018). Besides, the influence functions are typically approximated to estimate the essence of parameters to target data (Wu et al., 2022; Sekhari et al., 2021; Suriyakumar and Wilson, 2022; Foster et al., 2024; Golatkar et al., 2020a; Yang et al., 2025).
Nevertheless, the risk of over-unlearning persists, as parameters important for forgetting data may also play a significant role for retained data (Chang et al., 2024).
Data-centric unlearning aims to adjust pre-trained models through re-optimization and gradient updates (Neel et al., 2021; Cao et al., 2023; Graves et al., 2021; Shaik et al., 2024; Fan et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025b; Wang et al., 2025a)to address forgetting requests. (Golatkar et al., 2020a) introduce a scrubbing function during finetuning stage to align the unlearned model with the "gold model", which is continuously refined by subsequent research (Golatkar et al., 2021; Golatkar et al., 2020b; Shibata et al., 2021; Mehta et al., 2022; Tanno et al., 2022). DeltaGrad (Wu et al., 2020) and BAERASER (Liu et al., 2022) employ gradient updates using cached weight information during training to unlearn target data. Despite their achievements, methods of this kind rely on strong convexity assumptions, leading to unavoidable approximation errors.
Alternative approaches have explored the utilization of feature noise (Tarun et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b) and label noise (Chen et al., 2023) to diminish the generalization of forgetting data. Teacher-student framework (Chundawat et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Lin et al., 2023; Huang et al., 2022) is also employed to selectively distill knowledge, excluding forgetting data. While these methods provide intuitive solutions, they still face the inherent trade-offs problem of excessive or insufficient unlearning.
2.2 In-context Learning of Multi-modal large language models
The emergence of Transformer (Vaswani, 2017) facilitates the development of Large Language Models (LLM) (Brown, 2020; Floridi and Chiriatti, 2020; Touvron et al., 2023a; Touvron et al., 2023b).
Incorporated with Vision Transformer (ViT) (Dosovitskiy, 2020), LLM is equipped with efficient multi-modal capabilities, known as Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLM) (Li et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024a; Dai et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023).
By integrating Vision Transformers (ViT) (Dosovitskiy, 2020) and cross-modal alignment modules, LLMs are extended to Multi-modal Large Language Models (MLLMs), enabling joint reasoning over text and visual inputs (Li et al., 2022; Li et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2023; Ye et al., 2023). Within this framework, the representations of text and images are aligned through an intermediate structure.
In this setting, ICL allows models to perform zero-shot or few-shot task adaptation by conditioning on input demonstrations, without updating model parameters (Brown, 2020). Studies suggest that ICL can be interpreted as a form of implicit meta-learning or Bayesian inference over latent task structures (Garg et al., 2022; Xie et al., 2021).
Building on this paradigm, MMICL (Zhao et al., 2023b) introduces a context training strategy that interleaves visual embeddings with textual tokens, significantly enhancing multimodal in-context generalization. Related works (Alayrac et al., 2022; Liu et al., 2024a) further indicate that multimodal ICL not only supports task adaptation, but also reveals the internal alignment and similarity structure of learned visual–semantic concepts. These properties make MLLMs a natural tool for probing conceptual relationships across classes.
In this paper, we propose to leverage the strengths of MLLMs to guide the unlearning process through a novel perturbing label assigning strategy. The in-context learning capabilities of MLLMs are utilized to estimate the similarities of feature patterns among different class concepts, which subsequently guarantees the disentanglement of influence of target data.
Figure 2: The proposed unlearning framework MeGU. The MLLM is employed to acquire the conceptual similarities with a small subset of the training data. Incorporated with model prediction, the perturbing labels are determined.
The Fragment-Align strategy leverages a pair of feature noises trained from the frozen pretrained model to respectively restrain unique features of the target data while enhancing those associated with the retained data. The unlearning is achieved via aligning the target data towards perturbing labels while disentangling their influence.
3 Preliminaries
Problem setup
Given a dataset 𝒟={xi,yi}i=1N\mathcal{D}=\{x_{i},y_{i}\}^{N}_{i=1} where yiy_{i} belongs to label space 𝒴={1,⋯,K}\mathcal{Y}=\{1,\cdots,K\}, the objective of machine learning can be formularized as:
θ=arg⁡min⁡∑(xi,yi)∈𝒟θ⁡ℒ⁡(fθ​(xi),yi)\theta=\arg\min_{\theta}\sum_{(x_{i},y_{i})\in\mathcal{D}}\mathcal{L}(f_{\theta}(x_{i}),y_{i})
(1)
where fθf_{\theta} is the DNN model parameterized by θ\theta, and ℒ\mathcal{L} denotes the training loss function.
In the scenario of machine unlearning, the goal is to remove the influence of a designated forget set 𝒟f⊂𝒟\mathcal{D}_{f}\subset\mathcal{D} from the pre-trained model fθf_{\theta}, while preserving its performance on the retain subset 𝒟r=𝒟∖𝒟f\mathcal{D}_{r}=\mathcal{D}\setminus\mathcal{D}_{f}. This process yields the unlearned model fθ′f_{\theta^{\prime}}, where θ′\theta^{\prime} represents the updated parameters.
Building upon prior studies (Alzubaidi et al., 2021; Allen-Zhu and Li, 2023), deep learning models are widely recognized to process and interpret inputs in a hierarchical manner, wherein progressively deeper layers encode increasingly abstract and semantically rich representations. As the network depth increases, model parameters are able to capture more complex feature compositions that correspond to higher-level semantic concepts.
Motivated by this perspective, we hypothesize that during pre-training, the model learns a series of feature patterns and their corresponding mappings to semantic concepts. This process can be formalized as 𝒫k↦𝒞k,k∈[1,K]\mathcal{P}_{k}\mapsto\mathcal{C}_{k},k\in[1,K], where 𝒫k={pk1,⋯,pkM}\mathcal{P}_{k}=\{p_{k_{1}},\cdots,p_{k_{M}}\} denotes the features of the semantic concept 𝒞k\mathcal{C}_{k} from class kk.
