RPDR: A Round-trip Prediction-Based Data Augmentation Framework for Long-Tail Question Answering
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Background
2.1 Long-Tail Question Answering
2.2 Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG)
Passage retrieval.
Answer generation.
2.3 Dataset
3 Method
3.1 Synthetic Data Generation
3.2 Training an Inverse Model
3.3 Data Selection with Round-trip Prediction
4 Experiment
4.1 Experimental Setup
Baselines.
Metrics.
Training Details.
4.2 Main Results
BM25 excels on long-tail queries while dense retrievers outperform other types.
RPDR significantly enhances long-tail retrieval.
Data augmentation with round-trip prediction is a key factor.
The improvements in retrieval propagate to QA accuracy.
4.3 Ablation Study
Training with incorrectly recovered samples hurts performance.
5 Qualitative Analysis of RPDR and A Routing Mechanism
5.1 Qualitative Analysis
RPDR represents nuanced subword differences in long-tail entities.
RPDR (still) struggles with long-tail entities that have complex syntactic structures.
Questions in these datasets are ambiguous.
5.2 Routing Mechanism
Setup.
Results.
6 Related Work
LLM hallucinations.
Dense retrieval models.
Data augmentation.
7 Conclusion
8 Limitations
9 Acknowledgement
References
A Details of Main Experiments
Baselines.
B More Details about Random Selection
C Data Augmentation Scale and Model Performance
D Main Results evaluated using IR Metric
E Full Dataset vs. Data After Filter
F Scaling Dynamics of the Training Dataset over Multi-cycle Round Trips
G The Samples for Qualitative Snalysis
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17366v1 [cs.CL] 19 Feb 2026
RPDR: A Round-trip Prediction-Based Data Augmentation Framework for Long-Tail Question Answering
Yiming Zhang
††thanks: Work done when Yiming Zhang was visiting NYU Shanghai.
Correspondence: Yiming Zhang (yimingz@zju.edu.cn), Chen Zhao (cz1285@nyu.edu)
Affiliation: Zhejiang University
Siyue Zhang
Affiliation: Nanyang Technological University
Junbo Zhao
Affiliation: Zhejiang University
Chen Zhao
Affiliation: NYU Shanghai
Affiliation: Center for Data Science, New York University
Abstract
Long-tail question answering presents significant challenges for large language models (LLMs) due to their limited ability to acquire and accurately recall less common knowledge. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) systems have shown great promise in mitigating this limitation by integrating external retrieval mechanisms. However, dense retrieval models often face the same difficulties when generalizing to rare or niche knowledge. In this study, we introduce RPDR, a novel data augmentation framework that selects high-quality easy-to-learn training data, to enhance dense retrievers. Our approach is built around three core components: synthetic data generation, data selection with Round-Trip prediction to identify easy-to-learn instances, and retriever training with these instances. We evaluate RPDR on two long-tail retrieval benchmarks, PopQA and EntityQuestions, demonstrating substantial improvements over existing retrievers like BM25 and Contriver, especially on extremely long-tail categories. We identify the strengths and limitations of RPDR through detailed human analysis and propose a dynamic routing mechanism to dynamically route queries to specialized retrieval modules to further improve retrieval performance.11
1
Our code will be made available at https://github.com/yiming-zh/RPDR.
1 Introduction
The development of large language models (LLMs) has transformed a wide range of applications, from answering questions to supporting complex decision-making (Wu et al., 2024). Despite their impressive capabilities, a key challenge arises when generalizing these models to real-world scenarios: handling long-tail user queries (Kandpal et al., 2023; Dai et al., 2023). For instance, a user might ask about a lesser-known football player as shown in Figure 1. Addressing long-tail question answering (LTQA) is critical because it directly influences user trust and engagement. When systems fail to provide accurate answers to these uncommon queries, users may lose confidence in the system, reducing their likelihood of asking similar questions in the future. This interaction creates a negative feedback loop resulting in a reduction in long-tail training data that further degrades the model’s performance.
Figure 1: (Top) Negative feedback loop in long-tail question answering in large language model-based systems. (Bottom) We challenge existing findings that dense retrievers struggle on long-tail questions, and argue that through appropriate training, dense retrieval based methods RPDR can surpass BM25 on long-tail retrieval.
Given the scale of today’s pre-training data and LLMs, it is expected that LLMs can acquire a huge amount of information and answer long-tail questions with their parametric knowledge. However, recent work Kandpal et al. (2023) has shown that LLMs struggle to learn long-tail knowledge, and are prone to hallucinating in such cases. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) has emerged as a promising solution for LTQA (Wu et al., 2024). By integrating external knowledge through retrieval mechanisms, RAG systems aim to mitigate the limitations of relying solely on the parametric knowledge of LLMs. Despite their high potential, the technical challenge is how to retrieve relevant knowledge from millions of candidates for long-tail questions. Traditional term-matching-based information retrieval methods such as BM25 (MacAvaney et al., 2020), fail to capture nuanced semantic similarities. Dense retrieval models Karpukhin et al. (2020); Izacard et al. (2021) address this by encoding both queries and knowledge pieces into a shared embedding space, allowing similarity to be computed through vector comparisons. However, existing work shows that dense retrievers cannot generalize effectively to long-tail queries and perform even worse than traditional retrieval methods (Kandpal et al., 2023; Sciavolino et al., 2021a).
Our study challenges existing findings and claims that with appropriate training, dense retrieval methods can also excel on long-tail queries. Our intuition is to select easy-to-learn queries that are inherently learnable, in which the original text can be eas
