Improving LLM-based Recommendation with Self-Hard Negatives from Intermediate Layers
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract.
1 Introduction
2 Methodology
2.1 Overview Of Our Approach
2.2 Self-Hard Negative Extraction from Intermediate Layers
2.3 Cross-Layer Preference Fine-Tuning
2.4 Collaborative Reward Regularization
3 Experiment
3.1 Experimental Setup
3.2 Overall Performance
3.3 Ablation Study
3.4 Further Analysis
4 Related Work
5 Conclusion
References
A Appendix
A.1 Implementation Details
A.2 Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis
A.3 Deriving the Gradient of Cross-layer preference optimization loss
A.4 Comparison with RLVR-based Methods
A.5 Strategies for Selecting Intermediate Layers
A.5.1 Performance Comparison w.r.t. Different Layer Selection Strategies
A.5.2 The Guidance of Selecting kk across Different Scales of Backbones.
A.6 Strategies for Ensembling Model Outputs from Intermediate Layers
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17410v1 [cs.IR] 19 Feb 2026
Improving LLM-based Recommendation with Self-Hard Negatives from Intermediate LayersThanks: ∗ Equal contribution.Thanks: ✉ Corresponding author.
DOI: XXXXXXX.XXXXXXXConference: Make sure to enter the correct
conference title from your rights confirmation emai; June 03–05,
2018; Woodstock, NYISBN: 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06CCS: Information systems Recommender systems
Bingqian Li∗
Affiliation: GSAI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
email: fortilinger@ruc.edu.cn
,
Bowen Zheng∗
Affiliation: GSAI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
email: bwzheng0324@ruc.edu.cn
,
Xiaolei Wang∗
Affiliation: GSAI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
email: xiaoleiwang@ruc.edu.cn
,
Long Zhang
Affiliation: Meituan, Beijing, China
email: zhanglong40@meituan.com
,
Jinpeng Wang
Affiliation: Meituan, Beijing, China
email: wangjinpeng04@meituan.com
,
Sheng Chen
Affiliation: Meituan, Beijing, China
email: chensheng19@meituan.com
,
Wayne Xin Zhao✉
Affiliation: GSAI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
email: batmanfly@gmail.com
and
Ji-Rong Wen
Affiliation:
GSAI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
email: jrwen@ruc.edu.cn
2018
Abstract.
Large language models (LLMs) have shown great promise in recommender systems, where supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is commonly used for adaptation.
Subsequent studies further introduce preference learning to incorporate negative samples into the training process.
However, existing methods rely on sequence-level, offline-generated negatives, making them less discriminative and informative when adapting LLMs to recommendation tasks with large negative item spaces.
To address these challenges, we propose ILRec, a novel preference fine-tuning framework for LLM-based recommendation, leveraging self-hard negative signals extracted from intermediate layers to improve preference learning.
Specifically, we identify self-hard negative tokens from intermediate layers as fine-grained negative supervision that dynamically reflects the model’s preference learning process.
To effectively integrate these signals into training, we design a two-stage framework comprising cross-layer preference optimization and cross-layer preference distillation, enabling the model to jointly discriminate informative negatives and enhance the quality of negative signals from intermediate layers.
In addition, we introduce a lightweight collaborative filtering model to assign token-level rewards for negative signals, mitigating the risk of over-penalizing false negatives.
Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate ILRec’s effectiveness in enhancing the performance of LLM-based recommender systems.
Keywords: Sequential Recommendation, Large Language Models
Figure 1. Limitations of traditional negative sampling methods and solutions provided by ILRec, aiming at extracting more fine-grained and informative negative signals.
1. Introduction
Sequential recommendation aims to predict the next item a user will likely interact with based on the historical interaction sequence (Kang and McAuley, 2018; Hidasi et al., 2016).
Recently, as large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in text understanding and generation (Clusmann et al., 2023), enhancing recommender systems with LLMs has received widespread attention (Bao et al., 2023b; Geng et al., 2022).
As one typical paradigm, LLMs are leveraged to directly generating the identifier (i.e., a sequence of tokens) of the item for recommendation (Liao et al., 2024b; Bao et al., 2023a).
To adapt LLMs for recommendation, early work (Bao et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024) adopts Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), formatting interacted item sequences as text-based instructions and takes the identifiers of ground-truth items as responses for training. Considering the importance of negative samples in recommendation tasks, some studies (Chen et al., 2024; Liao et al., 2024a; Gao et al., 2024; Kong et al., 2025) further utilize preference-based policy optimization techniques (Rafailov et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024) to incorporate both positive and negative items in training, enabling LLMs to learn user’s ranking preferences. In particular, they propose to extract negative items via random sampling (Chen et al., 2024) or self-generation (Liao et al., 2024a; Gao et al., 2024), and design specific training objectives like uncertainty-based DPO (Liao et al., 2024a) and self-play learning (Gao et al., 2024) to better leverage information from negative samples.
Despite significant advances, current approaches remain limited in their ability to exploit sampled negatives in a discriminative, informative, and efficient manner.
As shown in Figure 1, these issues arise in the following aspects:
First, current approaches compare ground-truth items against a few negative items and assign rewards to the entire sequence of tokens in responses. Learning from these sparse and coarse-grained rewards makes it challenging for LLMs to capture fine-grained token patterns and user preferences, especially considering large amounts of items as potential candidates in full ranking tasks.
Second, the quality of these negative samples is often uninformative to guide the model’s optimization.
Most existing methods predominantly rely on negative samples collected offline from outdated policy models before further training.
As a result, these negative samples struggle to keep pace with the distributional changes of the current updated policy model (Guo et al., 2024; Levine et al., 2020), and do not represent the most informative or worth-learning negatives.
This mismatch hinders the model’s ability to distinguish hard negatives during training, ultimately leading to suboptimal performance.
Moreover, the additional preference alignment stage and the increased nu
