4 Analysis: on the Task Transferability of Coding Agent Training
We have established in §3 that the particular tasks included in Hybrid-Gym are effective for task generalization across diverse real-world coding benchmarks.
In this section, we investigate: what properties of these trajectories enable task transfer?
To answer this, we run controlled ablations that systematically modify trajectory structure and measure the resulting changes in performance.
As the ablations require repeated evaluation across many variations, we keep the analyses computationally tractable by evaluating on an easier subset of SWE-bench examples (denoted as “Easy 50”), which are solvable by Deepseek-v3, a strong reference model (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2024).
4.1 Output Format Must Match Downstream Tasks
While our tasks are designed around higher level tasks such as function localization and generation, we also find that how these behaviors are expressed in the training trajectories matters. Specifically, as stated in [Principle 1] in §2, we find that the output format of the tasks is a crucial factor.
All three downstream tasks in our experiments require the agent to generate a code patch as the output. To isolate the role of output format, we conduct a minimal ablation on our function localization task: instead of requiring the model to generate a comment in the codebase containing the fix plan, we simply ask it to generate the plan in a message.
We accordingly modify the training trajectories by removing the str_replace actions for writing comments and adding the fix plan in the final message generated by the agent.
As shown in Figure 3, performance on SWE-bench collapses when we remove the string replacement actions. These results suggest that for coding agent tasks, the production of patch-like outputs is not a superficial formatting choice but a crucial skill that the agent needs to learn.
4.2 Script-level Agentic Tasks Do NOT Generalize to Repo-level Tasks
We then validate [Principle 2], which requires the training tasks to have a repo-exploration stage.
To test this, we implement a script-level task, LiveCodeBench (LCB) (Jain et al., 2024a), which primarily evaluates function generation in a single file.
We contrast it with two repo-level tasks:
(1) the repo-level function generation task we use in Hybrid-Gym (introduced in §2), and
(2) documentation generation, which requires the agent to generate the docstring for a given function.
For fair comparison, we wrap the coding template and test script in LCB in a dummy repository so that the model interacts with the same harness and tool API.
Figure 3shows that despite having the wrapper to make LCB superficially a repo-level task, LCB is not effective for transfer to SWE-bench.
This negative result suggests that repository-level generalization requires more than superficial “agentic formatting.”
In particular, repo-level tasks induce behaviors that are largely absent from script-level problems: identifying and navigating relevant files, grounding edits in existing codebase structure, and producing concrete patch-like modifications that apply cleanly in context.
Figure 4: Effect of teacher model and data selection. (a) Effect of sampling strategy at fixed training budget. Repository diversity improves training but using the same repositories as in evaluation does not.
(b) training on issue localization trajectories with different teacher models. o3-mini (edited) indicates the same set of trajectories as o3-mini, but with text and action steps combined.
4.3 Task and Trajectory Complexity Matters
After identifying reasoning and planning as a crucial component in coding tasks in §2, we derive [Principle 3] that requires the task to involve a non-trivial level of reasoning.
Here, we examine whether task generalizability improves as training supervision more closely matches the multi-step, tool-mediated interaction patterns required for coding tasks.
We first examine tasks with ascending complexity: (1) single-shot string-replacement edits in which the task is to refactor a function by simply renaming it without replacing other usages of it, (2) documentation generation for a fixed function (as in §​4.2\lx@sectionsign\ref{sec:ablation_lcb}), and (3) the function localization task, which requires more complex reasoning than the previous two tasks.
We see in Figure 3 that as tasks become more complex and interaction-heavy, downstream SWE-bench performance improves, and models are substantially more likely to produce non-empty patches.
To isolate complexity effects from task identity, we also investigate the effect of trajectory complexity, which is operationalized as the number of agent actions (tool calls and intermediate components) taken in successful trajectories.
We pool trajectories from our repo-level task mixture and partition them by length, selecting the shortest and longest quartiles (25% each).
As shown in Figure 3, although the training sizes are the same, training on longer trajectories yields a large improvement in SWE-bench resolution rate, alongside a sharp reduction in empty generations. These results suggest that trajectory complexity is an important driver of task performance.
4.4 Even Successful Trajectories of the Same Task Instances may have Different Impact
In addition to training task design, we observe that the teacher model also plays a crucial role in effective training.
Specifically, we find that even successful trajectories for the same instances can yield very different distillation outcomes.
We illustrate a particular case in Figure 4.
On the issue localization task, we found that distilling from Qwen3-235B and Claude trajectories transfers well to SWE-Bench, but distilling from o3-mini trajectories degrades student performance.
The key difference we found is that o3-mini frequently separates reasoning and actions (i.e., tool calls) into different turns.
After training on such data, the agent collapses to the distribution of thinking-only conversational turns and does not learn to call tools at all.
We edit o3-mini trajectories by simply stitching adjacent rationale and action steps into a single example. The resulting data effectively transfers to SWE-Bench, indicating that model-specific behaviors such as separating reasoning and actions can strongly influence the effectiveness of distillation.
4.5 Sampling Strategies Affects Effectiveness
Finally, beyond task choice and trajectory structure, we also find that how training instances are sampled impacts downstream transfer.
We examine two key factors:
(1) repository diversity (i.e., the number of repositories covered by the training set), which is identified by previous works (Xie et al., 2025b; Yang et al., 2025c), and
(2) the domain of code. In the extreme case, we build training data from the exact same repositories we use in evaluation.
To investigate this, we keep the training budget fixed at 500 trajectories and sample from function localization trajectories. We compare:
(i) Min Repo-Diversity, where we aggregate instances from a small number of large repositories (7 repositories),
(ii) Max Repo-Diversity, where we sample one instance per repository (500 repositories) to maximize repository coverage, and
(iii) In-Domain Repos, where we construct function localization trajectories based on the 12 SWE-Bench repositories.
Despite using the same number of training instances and the same SFT recipe, Max Repo-Diversity yields higher SWE-bench resolution (Figure 4).
This suggests that exposure to a broader range of repository structures improves generalization to unseen repositories.
Surprisingly, training on the same repositories in evaluation does not improve the performance, suggesting that learning general agent skills is more crucial than memorizing repo-specific information.
5 Related Work
Coding Agents.
Compared to traditional seq-to-seq code generation (Chen et al., 2021) or static pipelines (Xia et al., 2025a; Antoniades et al., 2025), coding agents can dynamically call tools to interact with the environment, enabling end-to-end problem solving.
Recent works develop various coding agent scaffolds, including SWE-Agent (Yang et al., 2024), Live-SWE-agent (Xia et al., 2025b) and OpenHands (Wang et al., 2025)
Such agentic methods achieve strong performance on diverse coding benchmarks, including issue-solving (Jimenez et al., 2024) under various settings (Jimenez et al., 2024; Deng et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025b; Zan et al., 2025), test generation (Mündler et al., 2024; Jain et al., 2025a), and feature construction (Zhao et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2023; Jain et al., 2024b; Xie et al., 2024; Ouyang et al., 2025).
We therefore focus on improving agent systems for coding tasks.
Coding Agent Pre-training.
In the pre-training stage, recent work train the language models on general agentic tasks, including proprietary models (OpenAI, 2025a; Anthropic, 2025b) and open-sourced ones (Yang et al., 2025a; DeepSeek-AI et al., 2024).
For instance, Kimi-K2 (Team et al., 2025) constructs a wide range of synthetic tools and tasks to boost general agentic abilities.
In this work, we focus on synthetic tasks for coding agents.
Coding Agent Post-training.
In the post-training stage, one line of work focuses on the training method, such as rejection sampling (Pan et al., 2024) and reinforcement learning (Wei et al., 2025; Wang et al., 2024; Liu et al., 2025).
Another line of work improves training data construction, yet most prior datasets only cover a single task such as issue-solving (Pan et al., 2024; Xie et al., 2025a; Ma et al., 2024; Jain et al., 2025b; Yang et al., 2025c), neglecting other crucial applications, including test generation and library construction.
A concurrent work, SWE-Play (Zhu et al., 2025), designs training data for each of the downstream tasks and additionally presents agent-proposed tasks.
However, they do not conduct in-depth analysis on task transferability and fully rely on the agent to set up the complicated training environments, including building and installing a repository from scratch, which is challenging and limits the scalability.
In contrast, we conduct systematic analyses on what transfers and what does not for coding tasks and design scalable and cost-efficient tasks based on analysis results.
6 Conclusion and Future Works
We conduct in-depth analyses of the transferability across coding agent tasks.
We find that there are similar components shared by diverse real-world coding tasks (e.g., repo-exploration) that can be achieved by the agent with similar commands.
Based on the discovery, we derive a set of principles for task design, including output format matching, requiring repo-exploration, non-trivial reasoning, and simple setup.
We present four scalable and cost-efficient tasks that do not require setting up executable repositories.
With the resulting dataset, Hybrid-Gym, we achieve strong task generalization results on three real-world benchmarks. For instance, even without issue-solving or test-generation data in training, we improve Qwen2.5Coder-32B by 25.4% on SWE-Bench Verified and 7.9% on SWT-Bench Verified.
We also improve existing in-domain datasets by combining them with Hybrid-Gym (e.g., improving SWE-Play by 4.9% on SWT-Bench Verified).
We propose two future directions:
(1) Exploration of training tasks. As mentioned in §2, other training tasks may also satisfy our design principles. For example, a code execution task, verified by whether a function is successfully called with no execution error, or an environment setup task, which is evaluated by comparing the installed package versions with the setup file.
One can also make the current Hybrid-Gym tasks more challenging (e.g., also ask the agent to locate the function before implementing the function body).
(2) Analysis of trajectory effectiveness. We present in §4 that even successful trajectories of the same task instances may have substantially different impact in training. We use Figure 4 as an example. We encourage future researchers to explore the exact characteristics of a trajectory that are beneficial or harmful for training, and to improve the effectiveness of the trajectories for cost-efficient training.
7 Acknowledgement
We thank Andre He, Abhav Mehrotra, Zora Zhiruo Wang, Pranjal Aggarwal, Jing Yu Koh, Saujas Vaduguru, Atharva Naik, Yuning Mao, Xuhui Zhou, and Tim Dettmers for their helpful feedback on this work.
This work was supported in part by NSF grant DSES 2222762. EL was supported by the National Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), [funding reference number 578085], as well as the SoftBank-ARM Fellowship.
Impact Statement
This paper presents work whose goal is to advance the field of Machine Learning, with an emphasis on improving the generalization of coding agents across diverse software engineering tasks, supporting more transferable automated programming systems and improved software maintenance. The potential societal impacts of this work are consistent with those of prior research on machine learning–based coding agents. We do not identify any ethical concerns or broader societal consequences that would otherwise require specific discussion.
References
Anthropic (2025a)
Anthropic
Claude-3.7.
External Links: Link
Cited by: §3.1.
Anthropic (2025b)
Anthropic
Claude-4.5.
External Links: Link
Cited by: §2.1,
§2.1,
§3.1,
§5.
Antoniades et al. (2025)
A. Antoniades, A. Örwall, K. Zhang, Y. Xie, A. Goyal, and W. Y. Wang
SWE-search: enhancing software agents with monte carlo tree search and iterative refinement.
In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
ICLR 2025, Singapore, April 24-28, 2025,
External Links: Link
Cited by: §5.
Chen et al. (2021)
M. Chen, J. Tworek, H. Jun, Q. Yuan, H. P. de Oliveira Pinto, J. Kaplan, H. Edwards, Y. Burda, N. Joseph, G. Brockman, A. Ray, R. Puri, G. Krueger, M. Petrov, H. Khlaaf, G. Sastry, P. Mishkin, B. Chan, S. Gray, N. Ryder, M. Pavlov, A. Power, L. Kaiser, M. Bavarian, C. Winter, P. Tillet, F. P. Such, D. Cummings, M. Plappert, F. Chantzis, E. Barnes, A. Herbert-Voss, W. H. Guss, A. Nichol, A. Paino, N. Tezak, J. Tang, I. Babuschkin, S. Balaji, S. Jain, W. Saunders, C. Hesse, A. N. Carr, J. Leike, J. Achiam, V. Misra, E. Morikawa, A. Radford, M. Knight, M. Brundage, M. Murati, K. Mayer, P. Welinder, B. McGrew, D. Amodei, S. McCandlish, I. Sutskever, and W. Zaremba
Evaluating large language models trained on code.
External Links: 2107.03374
Cited by: §2.2,
§5.
Chen et al. (2025)
V. Chen, R. Malhotra, X. Wang, J. Michelini, X. Zhou, A. B. Soni, H. H. Tran, C. Smith, A. Talwalkar, and G. Neubig
How can we assess human-agent interactions? case studies in software agent design.
External Links: 2510.09801,
Link
Cited by: §1.
DeepSeek-AI et al. (2024)
DeepSeek-AI, A. Liu, B. Feng, B. Xue, B. Wang, B. Wu, C. Lu, C. Zhao, C. Deng, C. Zhang, C. Ruan, D. Dai, D. Guo, D. Yang, D. Chen, D. Ji, E. Li, F. Lin, F. Dai, F. Luo, et al.
DeepSeek-v3 technical report.
External Links: 2412.19437,
Document,
Link
Cited by: §4,
§5.
Deng et al. (2025)
X. Deng, J. Da, E. Pan, Y. Y. He, C. Ide, K. Garg, N. Lauffer, A. Park, N. Pasari, C. Rane, K. Sampath, M. Krishnan, S. Kundurthy, S. Hendryx, Z. Wang, C. B. C. Zhang, N. Jacobson, B. Liu, and B. Kenstler
SWE-bench pro: can AI agents solve long-horizon software engineering tasks?.
CoRR abs/2509.16941.
External Links: Link,
Document,
2509.16941
Cited by: §5.
Hui et al. (2024)
B. Hui, J. Yang, Z. Cui, J. Yang, D. Liu, L. Zhang, T. Liu, J. Zhang, B. Yu, K. Lu, K. Dang, Y. Fan, Y. Zhang, A. Yang, R. Men, F. Huang, B. Zheng, Y. Miao, S. Quan, Y. Feng, X. Ren, X. Ren, J. Zhou, and J. Lin
Qwen2.5-coder technical report.
External Links: 2409.12186,
Link
Cited by: §2.1.
Jain et al. (2025a)
K. Jain, G. Synnaeve, and B. Roziere
TestGenEval: a real world unit test generation and test completion benchmark.
In The Thirteenth International Conference on Learning Representations,
External Links: Link
Cited by: §5.
Jain et al. (2024a)
N. Jain, K. Han, A. Gu, W. Li, F. Yan, T. Zhang, S. Wang, A. Solar-Lezama, K. Sen, and I. Stoica
LiveCodeBench: holistic and contamination free evaluation of large language models for code.
External Links: 2403.07974,
Link
Cited by: §4.2.
Jain et al. (2024b)
N. Jain, M. Shetty, T. Zhang, K. Han, K. Sen, and I. Stoica
R2E: turning any github repository into a programming agent environment.
In Proceedings of the 41st International Conference on Machine Learning, R. Salakhutdinov, Z. Kolter, K. Heller, A. Weller, N. Oliver, J. Scarlett, and F. Berkenkamp (Eds.),
Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Vol. 235, pp. 21196–21224.
External Links: Link
Cited by: §5.
Jain et al. (2025b)
N. Jain, J. Singh, M. Shetty, T. Zhang, L. Zheng, K. Sen, and I. Stoica
R2E-gym: procedural environment generation and hybrid verifiers for scaling open-weights SWE agents.
In Second Conference on Language Modeling,
External Links: Link
Cited by: §1,
§1,
§2.1,
§5.
Jimenez et al. (2024)
C. E. Jimenez, J. Yang, A. Wettig, S. Yao, K. Pei, O. Press, and K. R. Narasimhan
SWE-bench: can language models resolve real-world github issues?.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations,
External Links: Link
Cited by: §1,
§1,
§3.1,
§5.
Liu et al. (2025)
Z. Liu, J. Chai, X. Zhu, S. Tang, R. Ye, B. Zhang, L. Bai, and S. Chen
ML-agent: reinforcing llm agents for autonomous machine learning engineering.
arXiv preprint arXiv: 2505.23723.
Cited by: §5.
Ma et al. (2024)
Y. Ma, R. Cao, Y. Cao, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, B. Li, F. Huang, and Y. Li
Lingma swe-gpt: an open development-process-centric language model for automated software improvement.
External Links: 2411.00622,
Link
Cited by: §5.
Mündler et al. (2024)
N. Mündler, M. N. Müller, J. He, and M. Vechev
SWT-bench: testing and validating real-world bug-fixes with code agents.
In Proceedings of the 38th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems
