2.1 Determining Option Availability
In the context of this research, we use the prevalence of a concept (i.e., an MCQ option) in large corpora as a signal of availability: We assume that frequently occurring concepts in the corpus correspond to higher cognitive availability for a test-taker. To operationalise this intuition, for a given MCQ, we retrieve a pre-determined number of relevant text passages from a large corpus and record how they are semantically distributed across the options of the MCQ. As a hypothetical example, for the question “What is the capital of France?” with options “Paris”, “Tallinn” and “Antananarivo”, we determine each option’s availability by its prevalence in a large corpus containing general knowledge.
Knowledge Corpora
As sources for the passage retrieval, we use the English Wikipedia [14] and BEIR, a large information retrieval dataset [10]. Using Wikipedia is a natural choice, as it contains large amounts of highly curated factual information. On the other hand, the passages in BEIR cover a much broader scope (e.g., news articles, forum threads & financial investment articles), albeit with less detail. We consider this difference relevant to our study: If large differences in the availability of MCQ options are observed using Wikipedia but not BEIR, it suggests that only individuals with expert domain knowledge might be able to leverage the availability heuristic. Wikipedia and BEIR are of similar size, containing 41.5 and 48 million passages respectively.
Retrieving Passages
In order to retrieve passages relevant to a given MCQ, we leverage semantic similarity between the MCQ options and the passages in the corpus. For this, relying on textual embeddings instead of n-gram frequency is preferable, as the former better capture conceptual nuance. Specifically, we use Cohere’s “Embed v3” [4] model to compute textual embeddings for each passage in the corpus and the combined options of each MCQ (e.g., “Paris Tallinn Antananarivo”). We only use the combined options as the retrieval query, excluding the question stem, as to measure out-of-context, instead of in-context availability. This choice also reduces the bias towards the correct answer: building on the earlier example, the presence of “France” in the query will lead to the retrieval of more passages related to Paris, thus obstructing its genuine availability. It is worth noting that the presence of the co-options during retrieval still offer some context, albeit less than the presence of the question stem. We explore the effect of the retrieval query in more detail in Section 3.2. Lastly, we also explore the effect of the number of passages retrieved, by retrieving 2020 or 6060 passages for each MCQ. We do this to study the over-representation of certain domains in corpora (e.g., general geography content is significantly more prevalent than specialised immunopharmacology).
Assigning Passages
Once the passages relevant to the MCQ options are retrieved, each is assigned to one of the options based on semantic similarity. To achieve this, we compute the textual embedding of the passage and each option. The passage is then assigned to the option with the highest cosine similarity, leading to a distribution of passages across the options (Figure 1).
2.2 Distractors Generation Method
We further aim to evaluate whether human- and LLM-generated options show similar patterns in terms of availability. To this end, we employ three LLMs from the Qwen 3 family [15], specifically the instruction-tuned/chat variants with 8, 30, and 80 billion parameters. Using three LLMs of the same family but differing in size allows us to also explore whether any observed option availability effects are mitigated or enhanced by using more powerful LLMs. We chose to focus on the Qwen 3 family as its models are capable, offer the aforementioned size scaling, and are more lightweight compared to proprietary closed-source alternatives.
To generate alternative distractors for a given MCQ, a simple generation prompt is used that includes the question stem, the correct answer, and the expected number of distractors (Figure 2). A default generation temperature of τ=0.7\tau=0.7 is used, as suggested in the model documentation [15], to ensure some generation stochasticity. In approximately 0.5% of cases, the wrong number of distractors was generated, the correct answer was presented as a distractor, or generated distractors were repeated. When this occurred, generation was repeated until the conditions were satisfied. While more curated prompts can lead to pedagogically better distractors [2], we rely on a simpler instruction as this more accurately reflects an intuitive and natural interaction with the model.
Instruction Prompt for Generation of Distractors
Provide n good distractors for the following Multiple-Choice Question. The correct answer is “answer”. Provide them in a “boxed” environment, separated by a vertical bar. Do not include explanations. Do not include the correct answer as a distractor and make sure to generate the “n” distractors.
Question: “Question Stem”
Alternative Distractors:
Figure 2: LLM instruction used to generate n alternative distractors. The model is instructed to output the distractors in a “boxed” environment, separated by vertical bars to facilitate automatic extraction. We empirically find that repetition in the instruction leads to better instruction-following, especially for the less-capable Qwen3-8b.
2.3 Manually Created Question Sets
We conduct our main experiments using two exam question sets covering the topics of Biopsychology and Immunopharmacology. These datasets satisfy three critical requirements for this research. First, these question sets target factual knowledge, where any availability differences between options are most likely to prevail. Secondly, they include student selection rates per option, allowing us to study whether, for example, high availability distractors are more commonly selected by students compared to lower availability distractors (RQ2). Lastly, the two sets are private, ensuring that the LLMs used to generate alternative distractors (as described in Section 2.2) have not encountered the human-created distractors during their training.
Both datasets originate from undergraduate courses taught at our institution. The Biopsychology data includes 396 three-option and 380 four-option MCQs from the Psychology programme, covering the textbook “Biological Psychology” [5], with selection rates reflecting an average of 300 responses. In comparison, the Immunopharmacology dataset contains 639 four-option MCQs from the Pharmacy programme based on “Basic Immunology” [1], with rates determined from approximately 100 responses per question.
Lastly, to address RQ3 regarding option availability in lower-quality crowdsourced MCQs, we also use SciQ [13], a dataset containing a broad range of 4-option science questions. As this dataset is public, we only use 10001000 MCQs from the test split, which carry a lower risk of being present in training data of the Qwen models we used to generate alternative distractors. It is worth noting that as the original work mentions, in the creation of this dataset, crowd-workers formulated their own distractors, but they also had the option to use suggested distractors generated using a small Random Forest model. This is an important characteristic contributing towards lower-quality MCQs, as crowd-workers were generally not domain experts capable of creating pedagogically valid distractors themselves. Some examples from all three datasets are presented in Table 1.
Table 1: Sample questions from the datasets. Correct answers are highlighted in blue.
Dataset
Question and Options
Biopsychology
Which part of the brain is associated with an inability to anticipate the emotional consequences of one’s decisions?
A) ventromedial prefrontal cortex
B) dorsolateral prefrontal cortex
C) amygdala
Immunopharmac.
Which cells are part of the adaptive immune system?
A) Plasma cells
B) Monocytes
C) Macrophages
D) Mast cells
SciQ
Which type of tree is dominant in temperate forests?
A) deciduous
B) vines
C) fungus
D) shrubs
3 Results
Here we aim to answer the three outlined RQs. As availability is measured per-option, we treat the 3 and 4-option Biopsychology question items separately. For all results, option A represents the correct answer 11
1
Naturally, the exams administered to students followed a different choice-order.. Additionally, for the Biopsychology and Immunopharmacology question sets, distractors are ordered by descending student selection rate (i.e., Option B is the most selected distractor) to facilitate answering RQ2 regarding availability differences between distractors. The SciQ distractors are ordered randomly, as student selection rates are not available for this dataset.
To assess differences in availability between MCQ options, we compare the number of passages retrieved per option, as discussed in Section 2.1. Since the total number of passages assigned to a question is fixed (either 20 or 60 depending on the experimental setup), this effectively enables comparing the proportion of passages assigned to each option. Consequently, we employed a Friedman test followed by post-hoc pairwise comparisons using the Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Effect sizes are reported as the matched-pairs rank-biserial correlation, and p-values were adjusted using the Holm-Bonferroni method (α=0.01\alpha=0.01).
Figure 3: Average out-of-context availability per option. Distractors are ordered based on student selection rates, with the exception of SciQ, where student rates are not available. For each set of options, 20 relevant passages are retrieved which are assigned based on similarity to one of the options. Passages are retrieved either from Wikipedia or the BEIR corpus. Statistically significant differences are marked with asterisks (* p<0.01p<0.01, ** p<0.005p<0.005, *** p<0.001p<0.001) and displayed alongside effect sizes.
Figure 3 shows the average out-of-context availability per option for all question sets. The results are based on the retrieval of 20 corpus passages per item, using only the combined MCQ options as retrieval query. In relation to RQ1, across the board we find that when using Wikipedia as the retrieval corpus, the correct answer to an MCQ shows significantly higher availability compared to the distractors, with medium to large effect sizes. However, this difference in availability is not observed using BEIR, where only small differences are seen in the opposite direction in the SciQ dataset. These findings align with the fact that Wikipedia has a broader factual and scientific scope compared to BEIR. Furthermore, in relation to RQ2, we find no significant differences between the availability of distractors.
3.1 LLM-Generated Distractors
To evaluate whether LLM-generated distractors exhibit differences in availability, we employ the methodology described in Section 2.2 to create three sets of alternative distractors for each item. The LLMs Qwen3-8B, Qwen3-30B, and Qwen3-80B are used, representing LLMs of generally varying capabilities. Since student selection rates are not available for the LLM-generated options, we compare the availability of the correct answer against the average availability of the distractors for each item. For this analysis, we present results based on Wikipedia as the retrieval corpus, retrieving 20 passages per item. To this end, a Bayesian Dirichlet-Multinomial model (uniform prior, α=1\alpha=1) was used to compare the availability of the correct answer against the average availability of the distractors. We report the probability of direction p​dpd, representing the certainty that the correct answer is more available than the distractors, along with the mean difference and 95% High Density Intervals (Figure 4).
Figure 4:
Average out-of-context availability per distractor generation method. Distractors are either h
