Arcee Trinity Large Technical Report
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Architecture
2.1 Tokenizer
2.1.1 Pretokenization
2.1.2 Vocabulary Size
2.1.3 Tokenizer Efficiency
2.2 Attention
2.3 Mixture-of-Experts
2.4 Normalization
2.5 Initialization
3 Pre-training
3.1 Data
3.2 Data Preparation
3.3 Infrastructure
3.4 Hyperparameters
3.4.1 Model Configurations
3.4.2 Training Hyperparameters
3.5 Context Extension
4 Post-Training
5 Trinity Large Evaluation Results
5.1 Capability Benchmarks
5.2 Inference Benchmarks
6 Discussion
7 Conclusion and Future Work
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2602.17004v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026
Arcee Trinity Large Technical Report
Varun Singh
Lucas Krauss
Sami Jaghouar
Matej Sirovatka
Charles Goddard
Fares Obeid
Jack Min Ong
Jannik Straube
Fern
Aria Harley
Conner Stewart
Colin Kealty
Maziyar Panahi
Simon Kirsten
Anushka Deshpande
Anneketh Vij
Arthur Bresnu
Pranav Veldurthi
Raghav Ravishankar
Hardik Bishnoi
DatologyAI Team
††thanks: See appendix for full list of contributors.
Mark McQuade
Johannes Hagemann
Lucas Atkins
Abstract
We present the technical report for Arcee Trinity Large, a sparse Mixture-of-Experts model with 400B total parameters and 13B activated per token. Additionally, we report on Trinity Nano and Trinity Mini, with Trinity Nano having 6B total parameters with 1B activated per token, Trinity Mini having 26B total parameters with 3B activated per token. The models’ modern architecture includes interleaved local and global attention, gated attention, depth-scaled sandwich norm, and sigmoid routing for Mixture-of-Experts. For Trinity Large, we also introduce a new MoE load balancing strategy titled Soft-clamped Momentum Expert Bias Updates (SMEBU). We train the models using the Muon optimizer. All three models completed training with zero loss spikes. Trinity Nano and Trinity Mini were pre-trained on 10 trillion tokens, and Trinity Large was pre-trained on 17 trillion tokens. The model checkpoints are available at https://huggingface.co/arcee-ai.
1Arcee AI 2Prime Intellect 3DatologyAI
Figure 1: The training loss graph for Trinity Large, with no sub-sampling or smoothing. For clarity, we indicate where the batch size was increased to 128M (134,217,728) tokens, as well as the points where we switch data mixtures.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) are rapidly evolving from use in broad-coverage chatbot applications to general-purpose components for software systems, with deployments spanning document understanding and generation, retrieval-augmented knowledge work, and workflows in which they serve as long-running agents. Tool execution abilities to interact with external environments, code understanding and writing, and long-context management have proven to be key capabilities for LLMs to be deployed effectively. Beyond capabilities, there is also a growing need for inference-time efficiency as workflows and contexts over which the LLMs are required to operate on grow larger and larger. Sparse Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) (Shazeer et al., 2017) models have emerged as a prominent way for companies to scale up their largest models while being much more efficient and economical to train (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025a; GLM-4.5 Team et al., 2025; Kimi Team et al., 2025a; Xiaomi LLM-Core Team et al., 2026). In addition to this, recent models incorporate modified attention module designs such as linear attention variants (Kimi Team et al., 2025b; MiniMax et al., 2025; NVIDIA et al., 2025b) or sparse attention variants (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025b; MiniCPM Team et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2026), aiming to scale context and throughput without prohibitively increasing training or inference cost. Additionally, the rise of reasoning models (OpenAI et al., 2024; Guo et al., 2025) has led to inference-time compute scaling as a new paradigm for scaling model performance, enabling models to think via intermediate output for tens to hundreds of thousands of tokens before returning a final answer. These long output chains, often coupled with large inputs that the models need to reason over, further underscore the need for models to be fast and efficient at inference time.
At the same time, the requirements of real-world adoption extend beyond raw benchmark performance. Deployment settings commonly require organizational and regulatory considerations, motivating models that can be audited, hosted, and adapted within environments completely owned by the organizations. In particular, enterprise deployments frequently require clarity about data provenance, licensing, and jurisdictional controls, and therefore benefit from open-weight foundations that can be owned and operated without reliance on opaque third-party checkpoints.
This report presents Trinity Large, the largest member of the Trinity family of open-weight Mixture-of-Experts (MoE) language models. The Trinity family also includes Trinity Nano and Trinity Mini, which were developed as smaller form factors to provide immediately usable open models as well as serve as steps in our scaling ladder that validate the data pipeline, architecture, training recipe, and infrastructure required for Trinity Large.
The Trinity family’s architecture is strongly informed from downstream use-cases, primarily the need for efficient training and inference. We adopt an extremely sparse Mixture-of-Experts layer and interleaved local and global attention (Yang et al., 2025) for efficient inference, and additionally adopt gated attention for stronger context comprehension capabilities. Additionally, the models were trained with the Muon optimizer (Jordan and others, 2024b), which enables a larger critical batch size and has higher sample efficiency than the widely used AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov and Hutter, 2019). Trinity Nano and Trinity Mini were pre-trained on 10 trillion tokens, and Trinity Large was pre-trained on 17 trillion tokens. Additionally, training stability was a key concern in the design of the architecture, due to the limited time and compute availability for the project.
Trinity Large has 400B total parameters, with 13B activated per token, and is trained on a large mixed corpus combining curated web-scale data and synthetic data. In the remai
