Efficient privacy loss accounting for subsampling and random allocation
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
1.1 Our contribution
Technical overview:
Numerical evaluation:
1.2 Related work
2 Preliminaries
2.1 Privacy and privacy loss distribution
2.2 Dominating pair for random allocation
3 PLD-based privacy accounting
4 PLD estimation for random allocation
Algorithm outline (Alg. , ):
Additional truncation.
5 Numerical results
FFT convolution.
Numerical stability
Privacy profile:
Privacy-utility trade-off:
DP-SGD with PREAMBLE:
6 Discussion
References
A Missing details from section
B Missing details from section
C Full implementation details
D Experimental results
License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
arXiv:2602.17284v1 [cs.LG] 19 Feb 2026
Efficient privacy loss accounting for subsampling and random allocation
Vitaly Feldman
Affiliation: Apple
Moshe Shenfeld
Note: Work partially done while author was an intern at Apple.
Affiliation: The Hebrew University of Jerusalem
Abstract
We consider the privacy amplification properties of a sampling scheme in which a user’s data is used in kk steps chosen randomly and uniformly from a sequence (or set) of tt steps. This sampling scheme has been recently applied in the context of differentially private optimization (Chua et al., 2024a; Choquette-Choo et al., 2025) and communication-efficient high-dimensional private aggregation (Asi et al., 2025), where it was shown to have utility advantages over the standard Poisson sampling. Theoretical analyses of this sampling scheme (Feldman and Shenfeld, 2025; Dong et al., 2025) lead to bounds that are close to those of Poisson sampling, yet still have two significant shortcomings. First, in many practical settings, the resulting privacy parameters are not tight due to the approximation steps in the analysis. Second, the computed parameters are either the hockey stick or Rényi divergence, both of which introduce overheads when used in privacy loss accounting.
In this work, we demonstrate that the privacy loss distribution (PLD) of random allocation applied to any differentially private algorithm can be computed efficiently. When applied to the Gaussian mechanism, our results demonstrate that the privacy-utility trade-off for random allocation is at least as good as that of Poisson subsampling. In particular, random allocation is better suited for training via DP-SGD. To support these computations, our work develops new tools for general privacy loss accounting based on a notion of PLD realization. This notion allows us to extend accurate privacy loss accounting to subsampling which previously required manual noise-mechanism-specific analysis.
1 Introduction
Privacy amplification by data sampling is one of the central techniques in the analysis of differentially private (DP) algorithms. In this technique a differentially private algorithm (or a sequence of DP algorithms) is executed on a randomly chosen set of data elements without revealing which of the elements were used.
As first demonstrated by Kasiviswanathan et al. (2011) this additional randomness can significantly improve the privacy guarantees of the resulting algorithm, that is, privacy amplification.
Privacy amplification by sampling has found numerous applications, most notably in the analysis of the differentially private stochastic gradient descent (DP-SGD) algorithm (Bassily et al., 2014) for training neural networks with differential privacy.
In DP-SGD the gradients are computed on randomly chosen batches of data points and then privatized through Gaussian noise addition. Privacy analysis of this algorithm is based on the so-called Poisson sampling: elements in each batch and across batches are chosen randomly and independently of each other. The absence of dependence implies that the algorithm can be analyzed relatively easily as an independent composition of single step amplification results. This simplicity is also the key to accurate numerical accounting of the privacy parameters of DP-SGD that are crucial for all existing practical applications of DP-SGD.
The downside of the simplicity of Poisson sampling is that independently resampling every batch is less efficient and harder to implement within the standard ML pipelines. As a result, in practice typically some form of data shuffling is used to define the batches in DP-SGD even though the privacy analysis relies on Poisson sampling (e.g., (McKenna et al., 2025)).
Data shuffling in which the elements are randomly permuted before being assigned to steps of the algorithm is also known to lead to privacy amplification. However, the analysis of this sampling scheme is more involved and nearly tight numerical results are known only for relatively simple pure DP (δ=0\delta=0) algorithms (Erlingsson et al., 2019; Feldman et al., 2021; Feldman et al., 2023; Girgis et al., 2021b; Girgis et al., 2021a). In particular, for the case of Gaussian noise addition there is no practically useful method of computing the privacy parameters of DP-SGD with shuffling.
The discrepancy between the implementations of DP-SGD and their analysis has been explored in several recent works demonstrating that shuffling can be less private than Poisson subsampling (Chua et al., 2024b; Chua et al., 2024c; Annamalai et al., 2024). Motivated by these findings, Chua et al. (2024a) study training of neural networks via DP-SGD with batches sampled via balls-and-bins sampling. In this sampling scheme, each data element is assigned randomly and independently (of other elements) to exactly one out of tt possible batches. Their main results show that from the point of view of utility (namely, accuracy of the final model) such sampling is essentially identical to shuffling and is noticeably better than Poisson sampling. Concurrently, Choquette-Choo et al. (2025) considered the same sampling scheme for the matrix mechanism in the context of DP-FTRL. The privacy analysis in these two works reduces the problem to analyzing the divergence of a specific pair of distributions on ℝt\mathbb{R}^{t}. They then used Monte Carlo simulations to estimate the privacy parameters of this pair. These simulations provide strong evidence that privacy guarantees of balls-and-bins sampling for Gaussian noise are similar to t
