Representation Collapse in Machine Translation Through the Lens of Angular Dispersion.
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Background
2.1 Next Token Prediction for Machine Translation
2.2 Measure of Representation Collapse
Average cosine similarity.
Matrix entropy.
Spherical variance.
Other methods.
2.3 Angular Dispersion
2.4 Efficiency
3 Regularized Transformer
4 Experimental Results
4.1 Data and Evaluation
4.2 Models and Training
4.3 Post-training quantization
4.4 Representation Collapse in NMT
Translation Quality.
Sensitivity to dispersion weight
Quantization.
4.5 Full Collapse in CoNMT
5 Conclusion
Limited evaluation scenarios.
Low-resource tasks.
References
A Training Details
A.1 Data Statistics
B Additional Results
B.1 Frequency-based Analysis
B.2 Quantization
C Additional Results
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2602.17287v1 [cs.CL] 19 Feb 2026
Representation Collapse in Machine Translation Through the Lens of Angular Dispersion.
Evgeniia Tokarchuk
Maya K. Nachesa
Sergey Troshin
Vlad Niculae
Affiliation: Language Technology Lab, University of Amsterdam
Affiliation: evgeniia@tokarch.uk, {m.k.nachesa,s.troshin,v.niculae}@uva.nl
Abstract
Modern neural translation models based on the Transformer architecture are known for their high performance, particularly when trained on high-resource datasets. A standard next-token prediction training strategy, while widely adopted in practice, may lead to overlooked artifacts such as representation collapse. Previous works have shown that this problem is especially pronounced in the representation of the deeper Transformer layers, where it often fails to efficiently utilize the geometric space. Representation collapse is even more evident in end-to-end training of continuous-output neural machine translation, where the trivial solution would be to set all vectors to the same value.
In this work, we analyze the dynamics of representation collapse at different levels of discrete and continuous NMT transformers throughout training. We incorporate an existing regularization method based on angular dispersion and demonstrate empirically that it not only mitigates collapse but also improves translation quality. Furthermore, we show that quantized models exhibit similar collapse behavior and that the benefits of regularization are preserved even after quantization.
1 Introduction
Text representations learned by Transformer-based models not only influence the performance of the target task, such as neural machine translation (NMT), but can also be extracted and used as a backbone for building retrieval-based models, such as retrieval-augmented generation (Lewis et al., 2020), kk-Nearest Neighbors machine translation (Khandelwal et al., 2021), and continuous-output machine translation (Kumar and Tsvetkov, 2019; Tokarchuk and Niculae, 2022). Effective training of Transformer models for sequential language tasks (such as NMT) is, however, known to be difficult,
in large part due to various forms of collapse of the internal representations learned
(Gao et al., 2019; Godey et al., 2024; Gerasimov et al., 2025; Barbero et al., 2024; Voita et al., 2019).
Representation collapse can be split into two phenomena: complete collapse and dimensional collapse (Hua et al., 2021; Jing et al., 2022).
A complete collapse occurs when a trivial solution to the optimization problem is found by collapsing all vectors into a single point. It can be observed, for example, in continuous-output neural machine translation (CoNMT, introduced by Kumar and Tsvetkov (2019) and further described in section 2.1), as well as in latent variable models (Chen et al., 2020).
In contrast, dimensional collapse is partial, and occurs when a high-dimensional representation
space is underutilized and all representations end up lying in a lower-dimensional space.
While complete collapse is clearly visible from the training loss and automatic quality metrics, such as BLEU or COMET, dimensional collapse is not that evident,
but studies have captured it for decoder-only Transformers
(Barbero et al., 2024).
A popular approach to mitigate representation collapse in domains with continuous representation, such as images or videos, is to employ contrastive learning (Chen et al., 2020; Jing et al., 2022; Wang and Isola, 2020), which commonly relies on data augmentation and negative sampling to achieve diversity in the representations. Although data-augmentation of text data was also successfully applied in contrastive-learning setups (Wei and Zou, 2019; Shen et al., 2020; Su et al., 2021; Arefin et al., 2025), defining contrastive pairs for textual data is non-trivial due to the discrete nature of text. Despite being a competitive approach, one of the downsides of contrastive learning is that it can lead to higher variance of the objective function, in addition to typically requiring larger batch sizes to achieve a good performance (Guo et al., 2025). Moreover, performance depends heavily on the quality of the negative samples. Wang and Isola (2020) show that if we take into account the spherical geometry of the representation, contrastive learning, in fact, can be decomposed into two separate components. The first is alignment, which enforces semantically close representations to be close in a vector space, and the second is uniformity, which ensures better coverage of the space. Following this idea, we can focus on uniformity or angular dispersion (Tokarchuk et al., 2025a) as a means to avoid representation collapse.
In this work, we focus on machine translation and revisit representation collapse in Transformer models. We analyze how collapse occurs in training and make a connection between representation collapse, the dimensionality of the model, and angular dispersion. We show that incorporating angular dispersion into the training of the model not only improves diversity of the representation but also leads to overall better MT quality.
2 Background
2.1 Next Token Prediction for Machine Translation
In NMT, given a source sequence 𝒙=(x1,…,xm)\bm{x}=(x_{1},\ldots,x_{m}), target sequence 𝒚=(y1,…,yn)\bm{y}=(y_{1},\ldots,y_{n}), and a finite vocabulary of type (sub)words V={t1,…,t|V|}V=\{t_{1},...,t_{|V|}\} such that xi,yi∈Vx_{i},y_{i
