URL: https://arxiv.org/html/2602.17223v1
Status: 200
Privacy-Preserving Mechanisms Enable Cheap Verifiable Inference of LLMs
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Background & Related Work
3 Threat Model
4 Protocol 1: Logit Fingerprinting
4.1 Cost Analysis
4.2 Security Analysis
4.3 Experiments
4.3.1 Honest Behaviors
4.3.2 Dishonest Behaviors
4.4 Removing Interaction
4.5 Limitations
5 Protocol 2: Logit Fingerprinting With Noise
5.1 Cost Analysis
5.2 Security Analysis
5.3 Experiments
5.4 Limitations
6 Properties Under Different Privacy Mechanisms
7 Outperforming State-Of-The-Art ZK Inference
8 Conclusion
References
A Background and Related Work
A.1 Privacy-Preservation
A.2 Verification
B Interaction of Protocols with Secure Multiparty Computation (SMPC)
C Interaction of Protocols with Trusted Execution Environments (TEEs)
D Formal Algorithm for Protocol 1
E Formal Algorithm for Protocol 2
F Training Details for Protocol 2
License: CC BY-NC-ND 4.0
arXiv:2602.17223v1 [cs.CR] 19 Feb 2026
Privacy-Preserving Mechanisms Enable Cheap Verifiable Inference of LLMs
Arka Pal1
††thanks: Correspondence to: arka@ritual.net
Louai Zahran
Affiliation: Ritual
William Gvozdjak
Affiliation: Ritual
Affiliation: MIT
Akilesh Potti
Affiliation: Ritual
Micah Goldblum
Affiliation: Ritual
Affiliation: Columbia University
Abstract
As large language models (LLMs) continue to grow in size, fewer users are able to host and run models locally. This has led to increased use of third-party hosting services. However, in this setting, there is a lack of guarantees on the computation performed by the inference provider. For example, a dishonest provider may replace an expensive large model with a cheaper-to-run weaker model and return the results from the weaker model to the user. Existing tools to verify inference typically rely on methods from cryptography such as zero-knowledge proofs (ZKPs), but these add significant computational overhead, and remain infeasible for use for large models. In this work, we develop a new insight – that given a method for performing private LLM inference, one can obtain forms of verified inference at marginal extra cost. Specifically, we propose two new protocols which leverage privacy-preserving LLM inference in order to provide guarantees over the inference that was carried out. Our approaches are cheap, requiring the addition of a few extra tokens of computation, and have little to no downstream impact. As the fastest privacy-preserving inference methods are typically faster than ZK methods, the proposed protocols also improve verification runtime. Our work provides novel insights into the connections between privacy and verifiability in LLM inference. We open-source our code at https://github.com/louai-ritual/priveri.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have increased significantly in size over the last few years. Recent models achieving cutting-edge performance (DeepSeek-AI et al., 2025; Qwen et al., 2025; Team et al., 2025), for example, now often con
