2.1 Overview Of Our Approach
2.2 Self-Hard Negative Extraction from Intermediate Layers
2.3 Cross-Layer Preference Fine-Tuning
2.4 Collaborative Reward Regularization
3 Experiment
3.1 Experimental Setup
3.2 Overall Performance
3.3 Ablation Study
3.4 Further Analysis
4 Related Work
5 Conclusion
References
A Appendix
A.1 Implementation Details
A.2 Hyperparameter Sensitivity Analysis
A.3 Deriving the Gradient of Cross-layer preference optimization loss
A.4 Comparison with RLVR-based Methods
A.5 Strategies for Selecting Intermediate Layers
A.5.1 Performance Comparison w.r.t. Different Layer Selection Strategies
A.5.2 The Guidance of Selecting kk across Different Scales of Backbones.
A.6 Strategies for Ensembling Model Outputs from Intermediate Layers
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2602.17410v1 [cs.IR] 19 Feb 2026
Improving LLM-based Recommendation with Self-Hard Negatives from Intermediate LayersThanks: ∗ Equal contribution.Thanks: ✉ Corresponding author.
DOI: XXXXXXX.XXXXXXXConference: Make sure to enter the correct
conference title from your rights confirmation emai; June 03–05,
2018; Woodstock, NYISBN: 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06CCS: Information systems Recommender systems
Bingqian Li∗
Affiliation: GSAI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
email: fortilinger@ruc.edu.cn
,
Bowen Zheng∗
Affiliation: GSAI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
email: bwzheng0324@ruc.edu.cn
,
Xiaolei Wang∗
Affiliation: GSAI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
email: xiaoleiwang@ruc.edu.cn
,
Long Zhang
Affiliation: Meituan, Beijing, China
email: zhanglong40@meituan.com
,
Jinpeng Wang
Affiliation: Meituan, Beijing, China
email: wangjinpeng04@meituan.com
,
Sheng Chen
Affiliation: Meituan, Beijing, China
email: chensheng19@meituan.com
,
Wayne Xin Zhao✉
Affiliation: GSAI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
email: batmanfly@gmail.com
and
Ji-Rong Wen
Affiliation:
GSAI, Renmin University of China, Beijing, China
email: jrwen@ruc.edu.cn
2018
Abstract.
Large language models (LLMs) have shown great promise in recommender systems, where supervised fine-tuning (SFT) is commonly used for adaptation.
Subsequent studies further introduce preference learning to incorporate negative samples into the training process.
However, existing methods rely on sequence-level, offline-generated negatives, making them less discriminative and informative when adapting LLMs to recommendation tasks with large negative item spaces.
To address these challenges, we propose ILRec, a novel preference fine-tuning framework for LLM-based recommendation, leveraging self-hard negative signals extracted from intermediate layers to improve preference learning.
Specifically, we identify self-hard negative tokens from intermediate layers as fine-grained negative supervision that dynamically reflects the model’s preference learning process.
To effectively integrate these signals into training, we design a two-stage framework comprising cross-layer preference optimization and cross-layer preference distillation, enabling the model to jointly discriminate informative negatives and enhance the quality of negative signals from intermediate layers.
In addition, we introduce a lightweight collaborative filtering model to assign token-level rewards for negative signals, mitigating the risk of over-penalizing false negatives.
Extensive experiments on three datasets demonstrate ILRec’s effectiveness in enhancing the performance of LLM-based recommender systems.
Keywords: Sequential Recommendation, Large Language Models
Figure 1. Limitations of traditional negative sampling methods and solutions provided by ILRec, aiming at extracting more fine-grained and informative negative signals.
1. Introduction
Sequential recommendation aims to predict the next item a user will likely interact with based on the historical interaction sequence (Kang and McAuley, 2018; Hidasi et al., 2016).
Recently, as large language models (LLMs) have shown remarkable capabilities in text understanding and generation (Clusmann et al., 2023), enhancing recommender systems with LLMs has received widespread attention (Bao et al., 2023b; Geng et al., 2022).
As one typical paradigm, LLMs are leveraged to directly generating the identifier (i.e., a sequence of tokens) of the item for recommendation (Liao et al., 2024b; Bao et al., 2023a).
To adapt LLMs for recommendation, early work (Bao et al., 2023b; Zhang et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2024) adopts Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), formatting interacted item sequences as text-based instructions and takes the identifiers of ground-truth items as responses for training. Considering the importance of negative samples in recommendation tasks, some studies (Chen et al., 2024; Liao et al., 2024a; Gao et al., 2024; Kong et al., 2025) further utilize preference-based policy optimization techniques (Rafailov et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024) to incorporate both positive and negative items in training, enabling LLMs to learn user’s ranking preferences. In particular, they propose to extract negative items via random sampling (Chen et al., 2024) or self-generation (Liao et al., 2024a; Gao et al., 2024), and design specific training objectives like uncertainty-based DPO (Liao et al., 2024a) and self-play learning (Gao et al., 2024) to better leverage information from negative samples.
Despite significant advances, current approaches remain limited in their ability to exploit sampled negatives in a discriminative, informative, and efficient manner.
As shown in Figure 1, these issues arise in the following aspects:
First, current approaches compare ground-truth items against a few negative items and assign rewards to the entire sequence of tokens in responses. Learning from these sparse and coarse-grained rewards makes it challenging for LLMs to capture fine-grained token patterns and user preferences, especially considering large amounts of items as potential candidates in full ranking tasks.
Second, the quality of these negative samples is often uninformative to guide the model’s optimization.
Most existing methods predominantly rely on negative samples collected offline from outdated policy models before further training.
As a result, these negative samples struggle to keep pace with the distributional changes of the current updated policy model (Guo et al., 2024; Levine et al., 2020), and do not represent the most informative or worth-learning negatives.
This mismatch hinders the model’s ability to distinguish hard negatives during training, ultimately leading to suboptimal performance.
Moreover, the additional preference alignment stage and the increased number of negative samples / rollout samples both introduce extra training and sampling costs, thereby reducing the efficiency of adapting LLMs for recommendation tasks.
To address these limitations, our main idea is to dynamically self-generate and utilize fine-grained negative samples during the training process.
Recent studies (Li et al., 2022; Sang et al., 2024) have shown that the outputs of expert models can be optimized by contrasting them with those of non-expert models, since the predictions of non-expert models often contain erroneous patterns or suboptimal choices. This observation provides a valuable perspective for negative sampling strategies.
Considering the internal structure of LLMs, the intermediate layers can also be viewed as models with enough predictive capabilities but weaker than the final output layer, as illustrated in Figure 2. This makes them highly promising of dynamically generating appropriately-hard negatives for model optimization during training.
Therefore, we propose to utilize the intermediate layers of LLMs as negative generators during training, and extract tokens with high generated probabilities from the intermediate layers’ outputs as negative signals.
These negative signals offer three primary merits:
First, these negatives are extracted in token-level instead of sequence-level. This implicitly extends the negative space and provides LLMs with an accurate and fine-grained comparison between the positive item and various negative items, adapting the model to large candidate-item spaces effectively.
Second, since the intermediate layers are jointly optimized during training, the negative signals can dynamically reflect the current preference learning process of the model. They are informative enough to be distinguished and penalized in the final output.
Third, the extraction of negative signals from intermediate layers can be seamlessly integrated into SFT within one forward process, which is efficient for adapting LLMs for recommendation.
Figure 2. Training loss curves of different layers in LLaMA3.1-8B on Instrument dataset using LC-Rec. LL denotes the final layer, while L−kL-k denotes the kk-th layer before the final layer.
To this end, we propose ILRec, an effective fine-tuning framework for LLM-based recommender systems, which utilizes self-hard negative signals extracted from intermediate layers to enhance preference learning for LLMs.
Specifically, we combine intermediate layers with additional prediction layers to get token prediction distributions, from which we select high-probability tokens, excluding the ground-truth token, as self-hard negative signals.
This method provides dynamically generated fine-grained negative signals, which enables LLMs to effectively distinguish highly informative negatives from a vast candidate item space.
To optimize the generation and utilization of these negative signals, we focus on two points, namely cross-layer preference optimization and cross-layer preference distillation.
Cross-layer preference optimization integrates self-hard negative signals as fine-grained penalty coefficients into the cross-entropy loss, thereby penalizing the corresponding negative tokens in final layer’s output.
Cross-layer preference distillation employs the output layer as a teacher to supervise the token generation of intermediate layers, which ensures that the self-hard negative signals are reliable and informative enough through training.
Furthermore, to address the potential false negatives in extracted tokens, we introduce a small collaborative filtering (CF) model to assign a reward to each penalized token. This helps prevent over-penalization and incorporates CF information during training.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
∙\bullet We present ILRec, a novel LLM-based recommendation framework that extracts fine-grained self-hard negative signals from intermediate layers for preference optimization.
∙\bullet We propose the cross-layer preference optimization and cross-layer preference distillation for better generalization and utilization of self-hard negative signals during LLM fine-tuning. We also employ collaborative reward regularization to mitigate over-penalization of sampled negatives.
∙\bullet Empirical evaluations on various datasets and scenarios demonstrate the effectiveness of ILRec.
2. Methodology
2.1. Overview Of Our Approach
Problem Formulation.
Given the item set ℐ\mathcal{I}, let S=[i1,…,in]S=[i_{1},\dots,i_{n}] denotes the user’s historical interactions in chronological order.
The goal of sequential recommendation is to predict the next item in+1i_{n+1} based on user’s historical interactions. For LLM-based sequential recommendation, the task is reformulated to an instruction-following paradigm. Given a prompt XX—containing task descriptions and the sequence of item identifiers in SS, the LLM is trained to generate the identifier of the next item YY via cross-entropy loss as follows, where y<ty_{<t} denotes tokens before yty_{t} in YY:
(1)
ℒs​f​t=−∑t=1|Y|log(P(yt|X,y<t)).\displaystyle\mathcal{L}_{sft}=-\sum_{t=1}^{|Y|}\log(P(y_{t}|X,y_{<t})).
Figure 3. The overall framework of ILRec.
Limitations of Negatives used in Current LLM-based Recommendation Methods.
Large Language Model Based Sequential Recommendation requires LLMs to generate the identifier (i.e., a sequence of tokens) of the item for prediction. In traditional NLP tasks, the response can be highly diverse and only a few key tokens are critical for conveying the meaning. However, in LLMRec tasks, the token generation process closely resembles a search process in the item space. Each previously generated token plays a crucial role, progressively narrowing down the possible items and directly influencing the final prediction. This makes the generation in LLMRec tasks much sensitive to training samples.
While preference optimization methods, such as DPO, bring the benefits of leveraging negative samples to LLMRec, there are still certain limitations, especially when the negative item space is extremely large:
∙\bullet Indiscriminativeness:
Most existing methods align LLMs with only a small number of sequence-level negative items, resulting in sparse and coarse-grained reward signals during training. In the presence of a large negative item space, such supervision makes it difficult for LLMs to capture fine-grained, token-level patterns and nuanced user preferences.
∙\bullet Uninformativeness:
Negative samples are typically obtained by random sampling (Chen et al., 2024) or from old policies before optimization. Due to distributional shifts that occur during training, the previously sampled negatives may not be informative or challenging for LLMs to distinguish, leading to suboptimal performances (As shown in Table 1).
∙\bullet Inefficiency:
Conventional training pipelines repeatedly sample and evaluate large pools of negative examples, which introduces substantial computational overhead and significantly slows down optimization, resulting in inefficient training.
Solution Overview.
To address the challenges posed by large candidate-item spaces and sparse positive feedback in recommendation tasks, we propose a novel framework that leverages fine-grained self-hard negative signals extracted from intermediate layers of LLMs to guide model optimization. Our approach consists of three key components.
(1) Self-Hard Negative Extraction from Intermediate Layers leverages intermediate layers of the LLM to extract self-hard negative signals. Specifically, high-probability tokens (excluding ground-truth tokens) from these layers are selected as token-level negatives, enabling the model to better align with fine-grained user preferences and effectively handle large negative-item spaces during training.
(2) Cross-Layer Preference Fine-tuning introduces a framework comprising Cros
