GraphThinker: Reinforcing Video Reasoning with Event Graph Thinking
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related Work
2.1 Video Scene Graph Generation
2.2 Post-training MLLMs for Video Reasoning
3 Method
3.1 Task Definition
3.2 Recap of GRPO
3.3 Event-based Video Scene Graph Generation
3.4 Event Graph-based Reinforcement Finetuning
4 Experiments
4.1 Experimental Setup
4.2 Comparisons of the state-of-the-arts
4.3 Ablation Studies.
4.4 Qualitative Analysis
5 Conclusion
References
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2602.17555v1 [cs.CV] 19 Feb 2026
GraphThinker: Reinforcing Video Reasoning with Event Graph Thinking
Zixu Cheng
Affiliation: Queen Mary University of London
Da Li
Affiliation: Queen Mary University of London
Affiliation: Samsung AI Centre Cambridge
Jian Hu
Affiliation: Queen Mary University of London
Ziquan Liu
Affiliation: Queen Mary University of London
Wei Li
††thanks: corresponding author
Affiliation: Nanyang Technological University{zixu.cheng,jian.hu,ziquan.liu,s.gong}@qmul.ac.uk,wei.l@ntu.edu.sg
Shaogang Gong
Affiliation: Queen Mary University of London
Abstract
Video reasoning requires understanding the causal relationships between events in a video.
However, such relationships are often implicit and costly to annotate manually. While existing multimodal large language models (MLLMs) often infer event relations through dense captions or video summaries for video reasoning, such modeling still lacks causal understanding. Without explicit causal structure modeling within and across video events, these models suffer from hallucinations during the video reasoning.
In this work, we propose GraphThinker, a reinforcement finetuning-based method that constructs structural event-level scene graphs and enhances visual grounding to jointly reduce hallucinations in video reasoning. Specifically, we first employ an MLLM to construct an event-based video scene graph (EVSG) that explicitly models both intra- and inter-event relations, and incorporate these formed scene graphs into the MLLM as an intermediate thinking process. We also introduce a visual attention reward during reinforcement finetuning, which strengthens video grounding and further mitigates hallucinations.
We evaluate GraphThinker on two datasets, RexTime and VidHalluc, where it shows superior ability to capture object and event relations with more precise event localization, reducing hallucinations in video reasoning compared to prior methods.
1 Introduction
Video reasoning requires understanding the causal relationships between events in a video to answer complex natural-language queries [4, 8, 11, 21, 34, 73, 14]. Unlike image-level understanding, it demands reasoning over temporal dependencies, event transitions, and cross-event causality. Such capabilities are crucial for high-level applications, including instructional video understanding [2, 61, 69], embodied decision-making [67, 36, 15], and assistive AI systems [17, 60], that rely on reliable video reasoning.
Figure 1: Current MLLMs [2] implicitly model event relations in video by token correlations. This often leads to hallucinations in video reasoning. For instance, when determining the temporal order of events, QwenVL-2.5 tends to yield temporal hallucinations due to a lack of explicit event-level evidence validation and reasoning. In contrast, our GraphThinker explicitly models both intra- and inter-event relations in accordance with selective visual attentions in a video to constrain reasoning under these structured event relations anchored by fine-grained visual evidence, reducing hallucinations and improving temporal consistency in reasoning.
Recent advances in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have substantially improved video reasoning by integrating visual and linguistic understanding.
Such models commonly are enhanced by post-training based supervised fine-tuning (SFT) or reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) for their video reasoning. Among them, SFT-based approaches [26, 19, 72, 71, 21, 16, 55] teach models to follow annotated reasoning paths, while RL-based methods [13, 62, 33, 57, 6, 38, 23, 44] optimize the models to maximize formalized reward signals. Despite effectiveness, the resulting models are often fluent at reasoning generation but weak at grounding true visual cues in the input video, inducing hallucinations in their reasoning [43, 45, 29, 10, 3].
To incorporate more event relations within a video into the reasoning process, some works [64, 35, 31, 16, 21, 54] employ text-based assistance, such as dense captions or key-frame summaries, that capture rough sequential information in a video. However, such captions or summaries are overly redundant and inherently unstructured, making the model prone to hallucinations and hindering its ability to extract useful information for reasoning.
Others [12, 27, 49] use video-level scene graphs that mainly capture global object relations, but these video-level graphs fail to represent the dynamic dependencies and interactions among events within a video.
As a result, current video scene graphs lack an explicit event-level relational structure, causing MLLMs confusion in event ordering and causal reasoning and leading to hallucinations in their reasoning (as shown in Fig. 1).
To minimize hallucinations during video reasoning, in this work, we construct fine-grained, temporally grounded event-level scene graphs to guide video reasoning of an MLLM. To this end, we introduce GraphThinker, a reinforcement finetuning-based
method that constructs structural event-level scene graphs
and enhances visual grounding to jointly reduce hallucinations in video reasoning.
Specifically, we construct structured event-based video scene graphs (EVSGs) that explicitly encode fine-grained event relations to guide the MLLM’s reasoning. Our EVSGs are constructed without human annotations by a self-generate and self-refine process. We first use an MLLM to generate multi-grained event-level dense captions, and then prompt the MLLM to refine the generated captions into structured scene graphs. Each graph captures intra-event relations through object nodes and their semantic interactions within an event, while inter-event relations are modeled as timestamp-based temporal edges connecting event subgraphs. Such graphs provide temporal event relations that constrain reasoning and form an intermediate thinking process, thus mitigating hallucinations.
Moreover, we further enhance the video grounding capability of the exploited MLLM through reinforcement finetuning. We introduce a visual attention reward that encourages the MLLM to increase its visual attention scores during video reasoning.
This visual attention promotion guides the MLLM to actively explore visual cues for reasoning rather than mainly relying on the input EVSGs. Together, the formed textual EVSGs and visual attention reward provide complementary benefits that enable MLLMs to achieve visually grounded, temporally consistent, and hallucination-mitigated video reasoning.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
•
We observe that existing video MLLMs lack the explicit modeling of event relations within input videos, which limits their ability to perform coherent and causally consistent reasoning, thus introducing hallucinations.
•
We propose GraphThinker, a reinforcement fine-tuning method for modeling explicit causal and event-level reasoning in videos. GraphThinker jointly integrates a structured textual graph and a visual reward to enforce visual grounding, mitigating hallucinations in video reasoning.
•
GraphThinker achieves effective improvements over existing state-of-the-art video reasoning MLLMs on two video reasoning benchmarks, RexTime and VidHalluc.
2 Related W
