[2602.16805v1] Simple Baselines are Competitive with Code Evolution
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
arXiv:2602.16805v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 18 Feb 2026]
Title:Simple Baselines are Competitive with Code Evolution
Authors:Yonatan Gideoni, Sebastian Risi, Yarin Gal View a PDF of the paper titled Simple Baselines are Competitive with Code Evolution, by Yonatan Gideoni and 2 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
Abstract:Code evolution is a family of techniques that rely on large language models to search through possible computer programs by evolving or mutating existing code. Many proposed code evolution pipelines show impressive performance but are often not compared to simpler baselines. We test how well two simple baselines do over three domains: finding better mathematical bounds, designing agentic scaffolds, and machine learning competitions. We find that simple baselines match or exceed much more sophisticated methods in all three. By analyzing these results we find various shortcomings in how code evolution is both developed and used. For the mathematical bounds, a problem's search space and domain knowledge in the prompt are chiefly what dictate a search's performance ceiling and efficiency, with the code evolution pipeline being secondary. Thus, the primary challenge in finding improved bounds is designing good search spaces, which is done by domain experts, and not the search itself. When designing agentic scaffolds we find that high variance in the scaffolds coupled with small datasets leads to suboptimal scaffolds being selected, resulting in hand-designed majority vote scaffolds performing best. We propose better evaluation methods that reduce evaluation stochasticity while keeping the code evolution economically feasible. We finish with a discussion of avenues and best practices to enable more rigorous code evolution in future work.
Subjects:
Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI); Machine Learning (cs.LG)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.16805 [cs.AI]
(or
arXiv:2602.16805v1 [cs.AI] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.16805
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Submission history From: Yonatan Gideoni [view email] [v1]
Wed, 18 Feb 2026 19:07:22 UTC (2,596 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled Simple Baselines are Competitive with Code Evolution, by Yonatan Gideoni and 2 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.AI
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.LG
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark

