[2602.17287v1] Representation Collapse in Machine Translation Through the Lens of Angular Dispersion
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Computation and Language
arXiv:2602.17287v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 19 Feb 2026]
Title:Representation Collapse in Machine Translation Through the Lens of Angular Dispersion
Authors:Evgeniia Tokarchuk, Maya K. Nachesa, Sergey Troshin, Vlad Niculae View a PDF of the paper titled Representation Collapse in Machine Translation Through the Lens of Angular Dispersion, by Evgeniia Tokarchuk and 3 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
Abstract:Modern neural translation models based on the Transformer architecture are known for their high performance, particularly when trained on high-resource datasets. A standard next-token prediction training strategy, while widely adopted in practice, may lead to overlooked artifacts such as representation collapse. Previous works have shown that this problem is especially pronounced in the representation of the deeper Transformer layers, where it often fails to efficiently utilize the geometric space. Representation collapse is even more evident in end-to-end training of continuous-output neural machine translation, where the trivial solution would be to set all vectors to the same value. In this work, we analyze the dynamics of representation collapse at different levels of discrete and continuous NMT transformers throughout training. We incorporate an existing regularization method based on angular dispersion and demonstrate empirically that it not only mitigates collapse but also improves translation quality. Furthermore, we show that quantized models exhibit similar collapse behavior and that the benefits of regularization are preserved even after quantization.
Subjects:
Computation and Language (cs.CL); Machine Learning (cs.LG)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.17287 [cs.CL]
(or
arXiv:2602.17287v1 [cs.CL] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.17287
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Submission history From: Evgeniia Tokarchuk [view email] [v1]
Thu, 19 Feb 2026 11:46:38 UTC (132 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled Representation Collapse in Machine Translation Through the Lens of Angular Dispersion, by Evgeniia Tokarchuk and 3 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.CL
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.LG
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark

