[2602.17558v1] RetouchIQ: MLLM Agents for Instruction-Based Image Retouching with Generalist Reward
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
arXiv:2602.17558v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 19 Feb 2026]
Title:RetouchIQ: MLLM Agents for Instruction-Based Image Retouching with Generalist Reward
Authors:Qiucheng Wu, Jing Shi, Simon Jenni, Kushal Kafle, Tianyu Wang, Shiyu Chang, Handong Zhao View a PDF of the paper titled RetouchIQ: MLLM Agents for Instruction-Based Image Retouching with Generalist Reward, by Qiucheng Wu and 6 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
Abstract:Recent advances in multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have shown great potential for extending vision-language reasoning to professional tool-based image editing, enabling intuitive and creative editing. A promising direction is to use reinforcement learning (RL) to enable MLLMs to reason about and execute optimal tool-use plans within professional image-editing software. However, training remains challenging due to the lack of reliable, verifiable reward signals that can reflect the inherently subjective nature of creative editing. In this work, we introduce RetouchIQ, a framework that performs instruction-based executable image editing through MLLM agents guided by a generalist reward model. RetouchIQ interprets user-specified editing intentions and generates corresponding, executable image adjustments, bridging high-level aesthetic goals with precise parameter control. To move beyond conventional, rule-based rewards that compute similarity against a fixed reference image using handcrafted metrics, we propose a generalist reward model, an RL fine-tuned MLLM that evaluates edited results through a set of generated metrics on a case-by-case basis. Then, the reward model provides scalar feedback through multimodal reasoning, enabling reinforcement learning with high-quality, instruction-consistent gradients. We curate an extended dataset with 190k instruction-reasoning pairs and establish a new benchmark for instruction-based image editing. Experiments show that RetouchIQ substantially improves both semantic consistency and perceptual quality over previous MLLM-based and diffusion-based editing systems. Our findings demonstrate the potential of generalist reward-driven MLLM agents as flexible, explainable, and executable assistants for professional image editing.
Comments:
10 pages, 6 figures
Subjects:
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (cs.CV)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.17558 [cs.CV]
(or
arXiv:2602.17558v1 [cs.CV] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.17558
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Journal reference:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 12279-12288, 2026
Submission history From: Qiucheng Wu [view email] [v1]
Thu, 19 Feb 2026 17:11:59 UTC (9,348 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled RetouchIQ: MLLM Agents for Instruction-Based Image Retouching with Generalist Reward, by Qiucheng Wu and 6 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.CV
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark

