[2602.17215v1] NotebookRAG: Retrieving Multiple Notebooks to Augment the Generation of EDA Notebooks for Crowd-Wisdom
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Human-Computer Interaction
arXiv:2602.17215v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 19 Feb 2026]
Title:NotebookRAG: Retrieving Multiple Notebooks to Augment the Generation of EDA Notebooks for Crowd-Wisdom
Authors:Yi Shan, Yixuan He, Zekai Shao, Kai Xu, Siming Chen View a PDF of the paper titled NotebookRAG: Retrieving Multiple Notebooks to Augment the Generation of EDA Notebooks for Crowd-Wisdom, by Yi Shan and 4 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
Abstract:High-quality exploratory data analysis (EDA) is essential in the data science pipeline, but remains highly dependent on analysts' expertise and effort. While recent LLM-based approaches partially reduce this burden, they struggle to generate effective analysis plans and appropriate insights and visualizations when user intent is abstract. Meanwhile, a vast collection of analysis notebooks produced across platforms and organizations contains rich analytical knowledge that can potentially guide automated EDA. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) provides a natural way to leverage such corpora, but general methods often treat notebooks as static documents and fail to fully exploit their potential knowledge for automating EDA. To address these limitations, we propose NotebookRAG, a method that takes user intent, datasets, and existing notebooks as input to retrieve, enhance, and reuse relevant notebook content for automated EDA generation. For retrieval, we transform code cells into context-enriched executable components, which improve retrieval quality and enable rerun with new data to generate updated visualizations and reliable insights. For generation, an agent leverages enhanced retrieval content to construct effective EDA plans, derive insights, and produce appropriate visualizations. Evidence from a user study with 24 participants confirms the superiority of our method in producing high-quality and intent-aligned EDA notebooks.
Comments:
11 pages, 7 figures
Subjects:
Human-Computer Interaction (cs.HC)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.17215 [cs.HC]
(or
arXiv:2602.17215v1 [cs.HC] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.17215
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Submission history From: Yi Shan [view email] [v1]
Thu, 19 Feb 2026 10:07:11 UTC (1,748 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled NotebookRAG: Retrieving Multiple Notebooks to Augment the Generation of EDA Notebooks for Crowd-Wisdom, by Yi Shan and 4 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.HC
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark

