[2602.17544v1] Evaluating Chain-of-Thought Reasoning through Reusability and Verifiability
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
arXiv:2602.17544v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 19 Feb 2026]
Title:Evaluating Chain-of-Thought Reasoning through Reusability and Verifiability
Authors:Shashank Aggarwal, Ram Vikas Mishra, Amit Awekar View a PDF of the paper titled Evaluating Chain-of-Thought Reasoning through Reusability and Verifiability, by Shashank Aggarwal and 2 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
Abstract:In multi-agent IR pipelines for tasks such as search and ranking, LLM-based agents exchange intermediate reasoning in terms of Chain-of-Thought (CoT) with each other. Current CoT evaluation narrowly focuses on target task accuracy. However, this metric fails to assess the quality or utility of the reasoning process itself. To address this limitation, we introduce two novel measures: reusability and verifiability. We decouple CoT generation from execution using a Thinker-Executor framework. Reusability measures how easily an Executor can reuse the Thinker's CoT. Verifiability measures how frequently an Executor can match the Thinker's answer using the CoT. We evaluated four Thinker models against a committee of ten Executor models across five benchmarks. Our results reveal that reusability and verifiability do not correlate with standard accuracy, exposing a blind spot in current accuracy-based leaderboards for reasoning capability. Surprisingly, we find that CoTs from specialized reasoning models are not consistently more reusable or verifiable than those from general-purpose LLMs like Llama and Gemma.
Subjects:
Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI); Computation and Language (cs.CL); Information Retrieval (cs.IR)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.17544 [cs.AI]
(or
arXiv:2602.17544v1 [cs.AI] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.17544
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Submission history From: Shashank Aggarwal [view email] [v1]
Thu, 19 Feb 2026 16:59:11 UTC (4,747 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled Evaluating Chain-of-Thought Reasoning through Reusability and Verifiability, by Shashank Aggarwal and 2 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.AI
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.CL
cs.IR
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark

