[2602.17614v1] Guarding the Middle: Protecting Intermediate Representations in Federated Split Learning
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Machine Learning
arXiv:2602.17614v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 19 Feb 2026]
Title:Guarding the Middle: Protecting Intermediate Representations in Federated Split Learning
Authors:Obaidullah Zaland, Sajib Mistry, Monowar Bhuyan View a PDF of the paper titled Guarding the Middle: Protecting Intermediate Representations in Federated Split Learning, by Obaidullah Zaland and 2 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
Abstract:Big data scenarios, where massive, heterogeneous datasets are distributed across clients, demand scalable, privacy-preserving learning methods. Federated learning (FL) enables decentralized training of machine learning (ML) models across clients without data centralization. Decentralized training, however, introduces a computational burden on client devices. U-shaped federated split learning (UFSL) offloads a fraction of the client computation to the server while keeping both data and labels on the clients' side. However, the intermediate representations (i.e., smashed data) shared by clients with the server are prone to exposing clients' private data. To reduce exposure of client data through intermediate data representations, this work proposes k-anonymous differentially private UFSL (KD-UFSL), which leverages privacy-enhancing techniques such as microaggregation and differential privacy to minimize data leakage from the smashed data transferred to the server. We first demonstrate that an adversary can access private client data from intermediate representations via a data-reconstruction attack, and then present a privacy-enhancing solution, KD-UFSL, to mitigate this risk. Our experiments indicate that, alongside increasing the mean squared error between the actual and reconstructed images by up to 50% in some cases, KD-UFSL also decreases the structural similarity between them by up to 40% on four benchmarking datasets. More importantly, KD-UFSL improves privacy while preserving the utility of the global model. This highlights its suitability for large-scale big data applications where privacy and utility must be balanced.
Comments:
Accepted for Publication in IEEE International Conference on Big Data (IEEE BigData) 2025
Subjects:
Machine Learning (cs.LG); Distributed, Parallel, and Cluster Computing (cs.DC)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.17614 [cs.LG]
(or
arXiv:2602.17614v1 [cs.LG] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.17614
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Submission history From: Obaidullah Zaland [view email] [v1]
Thu, 19 Feb 2026 18:40:12 UTC (1,315 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled Guarding the Middle: Protecting Intermediate Representations in Federated Split Learning, by Obaidullah Zaland and 2 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.LG
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.DC
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark

