[2602.16936v1] Heterogeneous Federated Fine-Tuning with Parallel One-Rank Adaptation
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Distributed, Parallel, and Cluster Computing
arXiv:2602.16936v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 18 Feb 2026]
Title:Heterogeneous Federated Fine-Tuning with Parallel One-Rank Adaptation
Authors:Zikai Zhang, Rui Hu, Jiahao Xu View a PDF of the paper titled Heterogeneous Federated Fine-Tuning with Parallel One-Rank Adaptation, by Zikai Zhang and 2 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
Abstract:Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable effectiveness in adapting to downstream tasks through fine-tuning. Federated Learning (FL) extends this capability by enabling collaborative fine-tuning across distributed clients using Low-Rank Adaptation (LoRA), while preserving data privacy by avoiding raw data sharing. However, practical deployments face challenges when clients have heterogeneous resources and thus adopt different LoRA ranks, leading to substantial initialization and aggregation noise that undermines performance. To address these challenges, we propose Fed-PLoRA, a novel lightweight heterogeneous federated fine-tuning (FFT) framework. Fed-PLoRA introduces Parallel One-Rank Adaptation (PLoRA), a new LoRA variant that replaces the classic multi-rank LoRA module with multiple parallel one-rank modules, and a novel Select-N-Fold strategy that folds untrained PLoRA modules into the pre-trained weights before local training, thereby accommodating heterogeneous client resources. We provide a unified analysis of initialization and aggregation noise of Fed-PLoRA and demonstrate how it addresses the limitations of state-of-the-art methods. Extensive experiments on diverse LLM fine-tuning tasks demonstrate that Fed-PLoRA consistently outperforms existing methods in both accuracy and efficiency. The code is available at this https URL.
Comments:
To appear in ICLR 2026
Subjects:
Distributed, Parallel, and Cluster Computing (cs.DC)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.16936 [cs.DC]
(or
arXiv:2602.16936v1 [cs.DC] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.16936
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Submission history From: Zikai Zhang [view email] [v1]
Wed, 18 Feb 2026 22:57:59 UTC (1,805 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled Heterogeneous Federated Fine-Tuning with Parallel One-Rank Adaptation, by Zikai Zhang and 2 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.DC
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark

