[2602.17608v1] Towards Anytime-Valid Statistical Watermarking
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Machine Learning
arXiv:2602.17608v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 19 Feb 2026]
Title:Towards Anytime-Valid Statistical Watermarking
Authors:Baihe Huang, Eric Xu, Kannan Ramchandran, Jiantao Jiao, Michael I. Jordan View a PDF of the paper titled Towards Anytime-Valid Statistical Watermarking, by Baihe Huang and Eric Xu and Kannan Ramchandran and Jiantao Jiao and Michael I. Jordan
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
Abstract:The proliferation of Large Language Models (LLMs) necessitates efficient mechanisms to distinguish machine-generated content from human text. While statistical watermarking has emerged as a promising solution, existing methods suffer from two critical limitations: the lack of a principled approach for selecting sampling distributions and the reliance on fixed-horizon hypothesis testing, which precludes valid early stopping. In this paper, we bridge this gap by developing the first e-value-based watermarking framework, Anchored E-Watermarking, that unifies optimal sampling with anytime-valid inference. Unlike traditional approaches where optional stopping invalidates Type-I error guarantees, our framework enables valid, anytime-inference by constructing a test supermartingale for the detection process. By leveraging an anchor distribution to approximate the target model, we characterize the optimal e-value with respect to the worst-case log-growth rate and derive the optimal expected stopping time. Our theoretical claims are substantiated by simulations and evaluations on established benchmarks, showing that our framework can significantly enhance sample efficiency, reducing the average token budget required for detection by 13-15% relative to state-of-the-art baselines.
Subjects:
Machine Learning (cs.LG); Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI); Machine Learning (stat.ML)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.17608 [cs.LG]
(or
arXiv:2602.17608v1 [cs.LG] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.17608
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Submission history From: Baihe Huang [view email] [v1]
Thu, 19 Feb 2026 18:32:26 UTC (282 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled Towards Anytime-Valid Statistical Watermarking, by Baihe Huang and Eric Xu and Kannan Ramchandran and Jiantao Jiao and Michael I. Jordan
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.LG
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.AI
stat
stat.ML
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark
