[2602.17594v1] AI Gamestore: Scalable, Open-Ended Evaluation of Machine General Intelligence with Human Games
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Artificial Intelligence
arXiv:2602.17594v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 19 Feb 2026]
Title:AI Gamestore: Scalable, Open-Ended Evaluation of Machine General Intelligence with Human Games
Authors:Lance Ying, Ryan Truong, Prafull Sharma, Kaiya Ivy Zhao, Nathan Cloos, Kelsey R. Allen, Thomas L. Griffiths, Katherine M. Collins, José Hernández-Orallo, Phillip Isola, Samuel J. Gershman, Joshua B. Tenenbaum View a PDF of the paper titled AI Gamestore: Scalable, Open-Ended Evaluation of Machine General Intelligence with Human Games, by Lance Ying and 11 other authors
View PDF
Abstract:Rigorously evaluating machine intelligence against the broad spectrum of human general intelligence has become increasingly important and challenging in this era of rapid technological advance. Conventional AI benchmarks typically assess only narrow capabilities in a limited range of human activity. Most are also static, quickly saturating as developers explicitly or implicitly optimize for them. We propose that a more promising way to evaluate human-like general intelligence in AI systems is through a particularly strong form of general game playing: studying how and how well they play and learn to play \textbf{all conceivable human games}, in comparison to human players with the same level of experience, time, or other resources. We define a "human game" to be a game designed by humans for humans, and argue for the evaluative suitability of this space of all such games people can imagine and enjoy -- the "Multiverse of Human Games". Taking a first step towards this vision, we introduce the AI GameStore, a scalable and open-ended platform that uses LLMs with humans-in-the-loop to synthesize new representative human games, by automatically sourcing and adapting standardized and containerized variants of game environments from popular human digital gaming platforms. As a proof of concept, we generated 100 such games based on the top charts of Apple App Store and Steam, and evaluated seven frontier vision-language models (VLMs) on short episodes of play. The best models achieved less than 10\% of the human average score on the majority of the games, and especially struggled with games that challenge world-model learning, memory and planning. We conclude with a set of next steps for building out the AI GameStore as a practical way to measure and drive progress toward human-like general intelligence in machines.
Comments:
29 pages, 14 figures
Subjects:
Artificial Intelligence (cs.AI)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.17594 [cs.AI]
(or
arXiv:2602.17594v1 [cs.AI] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.17594
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Submission history From: Lance Ying [view email] [v1]
Thu, 19 Feb 2026 18:17:25 UTC (9,279 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled AI Gamestore: Scalable, Open-Ended Evaluation of Machine General Intelligence with Human Games, by Lance Ying and 11 other authors
View PDF
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.AI
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark

