[2602.16961v1] Greedy Multi-Path Block Verification for Faster Decoding in Speculative Sampling
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Information Theory
arXiv:2602.16961v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 18 Feb 2026]
Title:Greedy Multi-Path Block Verification for Faster Decoding in Speculative Sampling
Authors:Rahul Thomas, Arka Pal View a PDF of the paper titled Greedy Multi-Path Block Verification for Faster Decoding in Speculative Sampling, by Rahul Thomas and 1 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
Abstract:The goal of $L$-step speculative decoding is to accelerate autoregressive decoding of a target model by using a cheaper draft model to generate a candidate path of $L$ tokens. Based on a verification algorithm involving target and draft model probabilities, a prefix of the candidate sequence is accepted, and an additional correction token is sampled from a residual distribution to ensure that the final output adheres to the target distribution. While standard speculative decoding uses a verification algorithm which is independent at each token on the path, a recent extension called block verification uses a joint condition involving all sampled on-path probabilities. Block verification (BV) was shown to be optimal over all verification algorithms which use only on-path probabilities, improving on standard speculative decoding. In this work, we first show that block verification is optimal even over verification algorithms that use off-path probabilities, by constructing an information-agnostic linear program (LP). Further, we can extend our LP to the setting where the draft model samples multiple candidate paths, and use it to construct a natural class of multi-path block verification generalizations. While computing the optimal algorithm in this class is not tractable, by considering a stricter class of greedy algorithms, we can formulate an efficient method called greedy multi-path block verification (GBV). Empirically, GBV can improve block efficiency by over 30% and reduce decoding walltimes by over 15% relative to BV. On Llama-3 70B, GBV can improve the end-to-end decoding throughput over SOTA multi-path verification methods by more than 15%.
Subjects:
Information Theory (cs.IT); Machine Learning (cs.LG)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.16961 [cs.IT]
(or
arXiv:2602.16961v1 [cs.IT] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.16961
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Submission history From: Rahul Thomas [view email] [v1]
Wed, 18 Feb 2026 23:55:01 UTC (58 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled Greedy Multi-Path Block Verification for Faster Decoding in Speculative Sampling, by Rahul Thomas and 1 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.IT
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
cs.LG
math
math.IT
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark

