[2602.16849v1] On the Mechanism and Dynamics of Modular Addition: Fourier Features, Lottery Ticket, and Grokking
Skip to main content
Search
Submit
Donate
Log in
Search arXiv
Press Enter to search · Advanced search
Computer Science > Machine Learning
arXiv:2602.16849v1 (cs)
[Submitted on 18 Feb 2026]
Title:On the Mechanism and Dynamics of Modular Addition: Fourier Features, Lottery Ticket, and Grokking
Authors:Jianliang He, Leda Wang, Siyu Chen, Zhuoran Yang View a PDF of the paper titled On the Mechanism and Dynamics of Modular Addition: Fourier Features, Lottery Ticket, and Grokking, by Jianliang He and 3 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
Abstract:We present a comprehensive analysis of how two-layer neural networks learn features to solve the modular addition task. Our work provides a full mechanistic interpretation of the learned model and a theoretical explanation of its training dynamics. While prior work has identified that individual neurons learn single-frequency Fourier features and phase alignment, it does not fully explain how these features combine into a global solution. We bridge this gap by formalizing a diversification condition that emerges during training when overparametrized, consisting of two parts: phase symmetry and frequency diversification. We prove that these properties allow the network to collectively approximate a flawed indicator function on the correct logic for the modular addition task. While individual neurons produce noisy signals, the phase symmetry enables a majority-voting scheme that cancels out noise, allowing the network to robustly identify the correct sum. Furthermore, we explain the emergence of these features under random initialization via a lottery ticket mechanism. Our gradient flow analysis proves that frequencies compete within each neuron, with the "winner" determined by its initial spectral magnitude and phase alignment. From a technical standpoint, we provide a rigorous characterization of the layer-wise phase coupling dynamics and formalize the competitive landscape using the ODE comparison lemma. Finally, we use these insights to demystify grokking, characterizing it as a three-stage process involving memorization followed by two generalization phases, driven by the competition between loss minimization and weight decay.
Subjects:
Machine Learning (cs.LG); Optimization and Control (math.OC); Machine Learning (stat.ML)
Cite as:
arXiv:2602.16849 [cs.LG]
(or
arXiv:2602.16849v1 [cs.LG] for this version)
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2602.16849
Focus to learn more
arXiv-issued DOI via DataCite
Submission history From: Jianliang He [view email] [v1]
Wed, 18 Feb 2026 20:25:13 UTC (5,394 KB)
Full-text links:
Access Paper:
View a PDF of the paper titled On the Mechanism and Dynamics of Modular Addition: Fourier Features, Lottery Ticket, and Grokking, by Jianliang He and 3 other authors
View PDF
HTML (experimental)
TeX Source
view license
Current browse context:
cs.LG
< prev
|
next >
new
|
recent
| 2026-02
Change to browse by:
cs
math
math.OC
stat
stat.ML
References & Citations
NASA ADS
Google Scholar
Semantic Scholar
export BibTeX citation
Loading...
BibTeX formatted citation
×
loading...
Data provided by:
Bookmark

