Gemini Robotics 1.5: Pushing the Frontier of
Generalist Robots with Advanced Embodied
Reasoning, Thinking, and Motion Transfer
Gemini Robotics Team, Google DeepMind1
General-purpose robots need a deep understanding of the physical world, advanced reasoning, and
general and dexterous control. This report introduces the latest generation of the Gemini Robotics
model family: Gemini Robotics 1.5, a multi-embodiment Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model, and
Gemini Robotics-ER 1.5, a state-of-the-art Embodied Reasoning (ER) model. We are bringing together
three major innovations. First, Gemini Robotics 1.5 features a novel architecture and a Motion Transfer
(MT) mechanism, which enables it to learn from heterogeneous, multi-embodiment robot data and
makes the VLA more general. Second, Gemini Robotics 1.5 interleaves actions with a multi-level internal
reasoning process in natural language. This enables the robot to “think before acting” and notably
improves its ability to decompose and execute complex, multi-step tasks, and also makes the robot’s
behavior more interpretable to the user. Third, Gemini Robotics-ER 1.5 establishes a new state-of-the-art
for embodied reasoning, i.e., for reasoning capabilities that are critical for robots, such as visual and
spatial understanding, task planning, and progress estimation. Together, this family of models takes us
a step towards an era of physical agents—enabling robots to perceive, think and then act so they can
solve complex multi-step tasks.
1. Introduction
Truly general robots will require a deep understanding of the physical world. Our previous work,
Gemini Robotics (Gemini-Robotics-Team et al., 2025), established a strong foundation by leverag-
ing Gemini’s rich world knowledge to create a Vision-Language-Action (VLA) model that exhibits
impressive interactivity, generality, and dexterity in direct robot control. We now introduce the
Gemini Robotics 1.5(GR 1.5) family of robot foundation models, built on the latest generation of
Gemini (Comanici et al., 2025). The new model family significantly enhances the capabilities of
Gemini Robotics and brings Gemini’s advanced thinking and agentic paradigm to the physical world. It
includes Gemini Robotics 1.5, a multi-embodiment VLA model (Bjorck et al., 2025; Intelligence et al.,
2025; Wen et al., 2025; Zitkovich et al., 2023) with strong reasoning and generalization, and Gemini
Robotics-ER 1.5, a generalist Vision-Language Model (VLM) that achieves a new state-of-the-art across
embodied reasoning benchmarks. We combine these two models into an agentic system that enables
robots to solve complex problems by orchestrating user dialogue, high-level reasoning and planning,
agentic tool use and low-level action.
Gemini Robotics 1.5advances the frontier of Vision-Language-Action (VLA) pre-training by integrat-
ing two core breakthroughs. Firstly, a novel architecture and a Motion Transfer (MT) mechanism
enable the model to learn from diverse robot data sources, forming a unified understanding of motion
and physics. This multi-embodiment pre-training allows GR 1.5 to control multiple robots, including
the ALOHA, Bi-arm Franka, and Apollo humanoid robots, without any robot-specific post-training, and
it also enables zero-shot skill transfer from one robot to another. Secondly, GR 1.5 is a Thinking VLA
1See Contributions and Acknowledgments section for full author list. Please send correspondence to
gemini-robotics-report@google.com.
© 2025 Google DeepMind. All rights reserved
Gemini Robotics 1.5: Pushing the Frontier of Generalist Robots with Advanced Embodied Reasoning, Thinking, and Motion Transfer
T e x t
A c t i o n
Figure 1 |The Gemini Robotics 1.5 family of models consists of Gemini Robotics 1.5, a VLA, and Gemini
Robotics 1.5-ER, a VLM with state-of-the-art embodied reasoning capabilities. They can be combined together
to form a powerful agentic framework.
that can explicitly reason about its actions, interleaving a stream of thoughts with physical movements.
This allows the model to convert visual observations into language-based thoughts, simplify complex
instructions, detect task success or failure, propose recovery behaviors, and make the robot’s actions
more interpretable to human users.
Gemini Robotics-ER 1.5(GR-ER 1.5) advances the state-of-the-art for embodied reasoning (Chen
et al., 2024a,b; Li et al., 2023; Zhi et al., 2025), i.e., the visuo-spatial-temporal understanding of
the physical world that is required for robotic applications. Building upon Gemini’s state-of-the-art
thinking and multimodal capabilities, GR-ER 1.5 significantly outperforms other frontier models
across a broad suite of embodied intelligence benchmarks, while retaining the general capabilities of a
frontier model and being considerably faster. GR-ER 1.5’s physical understanding combines naturally
with Gemini’s ability to use tools, communicate using modalities like video and audio, and write code,
opening up a broad spectrum of potential applications.
To achieve truly general-purpose robot agents, we combine our models in an agentic framework
(Figure 1). This framework is key to unlocking new capabilities: it handles long-horizon task execution
via complex planning and adaptive orchestration, facilitates multimodal interaction, enables robots to
leverage user-specified tools (e.g. web search) to solve problems and complete tasks, and implements
a multi-layered safety mechanism through explicit reasoning about safety violations.
2