
SOURCE https://arxiv.org/html/2601.11778v1
Translation as a Scalable Proxy for Multilingual Evaluation
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2601.11778v1 [cs.CL] 16 Jan 2026
Translation as a Scalable Proxy for Multilingual Evaluation
Sheriff Issaka
Affiliation: University of California, Los Angeles
Erick Rosas Gonzalez11footnotemark:
1
Affiliation: University of California, Los Angeles
Lieqi Liu
††thanks: Equal contribution.
Affiliation: University of California, Los Angeles
Evans Kofi Agyei
Affiliation: African Languages Lab
Lucas Bandarkar
Affiliation: University of California, Los Angeles
Nanyun Peng
Affiliation: University of California, Los Angeles
David Ifeoluwa Adelani
Affiliation: Mila - Quebec AI Institute, McGill University & Canada CIFAR AI Chair
Francisco Guzmán
Affiliation: Handshake AI
Correspondence:sheriff@cs.ucla.edu
Saadia Gabriel
Affiliation: University of California, Los Angeles
Abstract
The rapid proliferation of LLMs has created a critical evaluation paradox: while LLMs claim multilingual proficiency, comprehensive non-machine-translated benchmarks exist for fewer than 30 languages, leaving > 98% of the world’s 7,000 languages in an empirical void. Traditional benchmark construction faces scaling challenges such as cost, scarcity of domain experts, and data contamination. We evaluate the validity of a simpler alternative: can translation quality alone indicate a model’s broader multilingual capabilities? Through systematic evaluation of 14 models (1B-72B parameters) across 9 diverse benchmarks and 7 translation metrics, we find that translation performance is a good indicator of downstream task success (e.g., Phi-4, median Pearson r : MetricX = 0.89, xCOMET = 0.91, SSA-COMET = 0.87). These results suggest that the representational abilities supporting faithful translation overlap with those required for multilingual understanding. Translation quality, thus emerges as a strong, inexpensive first-pass proxy of multilingual performance, enabling a translation-first screening with targeted follow-up for specific tasks. 11
1
To promote accessibility, we provide translations of this abstract in 10 different languages in Appendix I, generated using Mansa and ChatGPT 5.22
2
Code & Data: https://translation-as-multilingual-proxy.github.io/
1 Introduction
The rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs) has created a major technological paradox: while these models are deployed globally and claim multilingual capabilities Ouyang et al. (2022a); OpenAI et al. (2024); Touvron et al. (2023); Workshop et al. (2023); Xue et al. (2021), we lack the basic infrastructure to assess their abilities. Of the world’s 7,000 languages, comprehensive non-machine-translated benchmarks exist for fewer than 30 overlapping languages Choenni et al. (2024); Hada et al. (2024); Adelani et al. (2025); Singh et al. (2025); Cobbe et al. (2021); Lewis et al. (2020); Zellers et al. (2019); Lin et al. (2022), leaving more than 98% of linguistic diversity unmeasured. This evaluation vacuum has profound consequences as entire language communities are excluded from AI development, not because their languages are inherently unsuitable for modeling, but because we simply cannot measure whether models work for them at all Zhu et al. (2024); Xu et al. (2025); Chang et al. (2023); Issaka et al. (2025). For these low-resourced languages (LRLs), evaluations suffer from a dual failure: they are frequently nonexistent, and when present, systematically overestimate model capabilities Ahuja et al. (2022); Choenni et al. (2024).
As a response, this work explores a simple but overlooked question:
Can translation quality serve as a reliable, scalable, and cost-effective proxy for a model’s broader multilingual capabilities?
The current paradigm of building task-specific benchmarks for each language has proven economically costly, inherently unscalable, and systematically biased Li et al. (2024b); Yüksel et al. (2024); Adelani et al. (2025). A recent analysis of over 2,000 benchmarks revealed that despite investments exceeding tens of millions of dollars between 2021 and 2024, coverage remains overwhelmingly concentrated on English and a handful of high-resource languages Wu et al. (2025a). Even well-intentioned efforts to automatically translate existing benchmarks fail systematically, as these machine translations cannot capture cultural and linguistic nuances, resulting in evaluations that correlate poorly with human judgments and perpetuate biases Wu et al. (2025a); Romanou et al. (2024b); Ramezani and Xu (2023); Singh et al. (2024); Aakanksha et al. (2024).
Figure 1: Pearson correlation matrix for the Phi-4 (14B) model, showing correlations between MT quality metrics and multilingual benchmark performance on FLORES-200. Color intensity indicates the strength of correlation, with darker red denoting stronger positive correlations.
We hypothesize that high-quality, human-verified parallel corpora could provide a foundation for evaluating general multilingual capabilities. This claim rests on a central insight: translation is one of the most demanding natural language tasks as it requires bridging non-isomorphic linguistic systems while preserving meaning across semantics, pragmatics, discourse structure, and cultural context Ataman et al. (2025); Liu et al. (2025).
To test this hypothesis, we conduct the most comprehensive correlation analysis to date as described in §3. We examine 14 models spanning 5 distinct families (Llama AI@Meta (2024), DeepSeek DeepSeek-AI (2025), Qwen Yang et al. (2025); Qwen et al. (2025), Gemma Team et al. (2025b), Phi Abdin et al. (2024)), ranging from 1B to 72B parameters. We evaluate their performance across 9 diverse multilingual benchmarks (TruthfulQA Lai et al. (2023), MLQA Lewis et al. (2020), GlobalMMLU Singh et al. (2025), Belebele Bandarkar et al. (2024), MGSM Shi et al. (2022b), AfriMMLU Adelani et al. (2025), HellaSwag Lai et al. (2023), AfriXNLI Adelani et al. (2025), INCLUDE Romanou et al. (2024a)) that span the full spectrum of language understanding: knowledge retrieval, logical reasoning, reading comprehension, and natural language inference. These benchmark scores are then systematically correlated with 7 distinct machine translation (MT) quality metrics across 3 translation datasets (Flores-200 NLLB Team et al. (2022), WMT24++ Deutsch et al. (2025), NTREX Federmann et al. (2022); Enevoldsen et al. (2025); Muennighoff et al. (2022)), enabling us to examine whether translation quality consistently correlates with performance across different task types, model architectures, and language families.
Our findings in §4 demonstrate alignment with this hypothesis: translation quality correlates well with downstream task performance across most language-task combinations, yielding a median Pearson of r = 0.89 for MetricX, 0.91 for xCOMET, and 0.87 for SSA-COMET. This suggests that the neural representations required for high-quality translation may be intertwined with those needed for complex reasoning. Translation quality, therefore, offers a low-cost first-pass signal of multilingual performance. While it cannot replace task-specific benchmarks entirely, it enables a practical two-stage evaluation pipeline where translation metrics provide rapid assessment across thousands of languages, followed by targeted benchmark evaluation only where needed.
2 Related Work
LLMs have changed natural language processing (NLP) and the space of AI Brown et al. (2020); Ouyang et al. (2022b); Bai et al. (2022); OpenAI et al. (2024); Team et al. (2025a).
Consequently, the rapid development of multilingual LLMs has created a significant challenge: how can we reliably and efficiently evaluate their capabilities across a diverse linguistic landscape? The academic community has largely pursued the path of building comprehensive, task-specific benchmarks that aim for exhaustive testing.
2.1 Multilingual Benchmark
Recent research has adopted two approaches to multilingual LLM evaluation. The first involved translating existing English evaluation suites into other languages using either human translators or MT systems Shi et al. (2022a); Lai et al. (2023); Bandarkar et al. (2024); Singh et al. (2025); Hupkes and Bogoychev (2025). Works such as XNLI extended natural language inference to 15 languages, establishing a paradigm that was adopted by benchmarks for question answering (MLQA), commonsense reasoning (XCOPA), and mathematical reasoning (MGSM) (Conneau et al., 2018; Lewis et al., 2020; Ponti et al., 2020; Shi et al., 2022b).
To address the limitations and potential biases of this translation-centric approach, a second line focuses on creating more culturally-centric and linguistically nuanced benchmarks curated directly in target languages. For example, studies collected human exam questions from specific regions in the target language with examples in Chinese, Indonesian, and Turkish Koto et al. (2023); Li et al. (2024a); Yüksel et al. (2024).
Other efforts expanded multitask evaluation with a focus on low-resourced regions, as seen in Global MMLU and IrokoBench (Singh et al., 2025; Adelani et al., 2025). Other studies emphasize the inclusion of culturally specific content in their evaluation, such as CulturalBench Chiu et al. (2025), ArtELingo-28 Mohamed et al. (2024), and CVQA Romero et al. (2024).
While these benchmarks provide a thorough assessment of a model’s multilingual capabilities, their primary limitation is the difficulty in creating them. They are computationally and financially expensive, time-consuming to build and run, making frequent or large-scale evaluation prohibitive. Thus, the (left-behind) language communities that will need such evaluations the most are those least likely to have the said resources to create such benchmarks (Issaka et al., 2024).
2.2 Machine Translation Metrics
The field of MT metrics has evolved significantly from its reliance on lexical overlap methods like BLEU and ChrF++, which often fail to capture semantic accuracy (Papineni et al., 2002; Popović, 2017). The current state of the art is dominated by embedding neural metrics trained on human judgments. Models like COMET and MetricX leverage powerful encoders to score translations based on semantic similarity rather than surface-level n-gram matching (Rei et al., 2020; Juraska et al., 2024). This has made translation evaluation on broad coverage datasets like FLORES-200 (NLLB Team et al., 2022) an attractive proxy for a model’s general cross-lingual understanding. In fact, many large-scale evaluation suites now include translation as a core task along with reasoning and knowledge assessments (Zhang et al., 2025).
3 Methods
3.1 Evaluation Design
Our study investigates the relationship between MT quality and multilingual task performance. To this end, we evaluate translation outputs of LLMs and compare them against benchmark performance across diverse categories. The evaluation framework consists of three components: (1) MT for direct measurement of cross-lingual quality, (2) benchmark tasks spanning reasoning, comprehension, and inference, and (3) correlation analysis between translation metrics and benchmark scores.
3.2 Translation Evaluation
We adopt Flores-200, WMT24++, and NTREX datasets, which provide translated parallel corpora in about 200 languages, as our primary testbed for translation quality NLLB Team et al. (2022); Deutsch et al. (2025); Federmann et al. (2022); Enevoldsen et al. (2025); Muennighoff et al. (2022). These datasets cover a broad spectrum of language families and resource levels, ensuring representativeness for both high- and low-resource settings (Table 5 in Appendix). We use different datasets to ensure that the results we see are not singularly aligned with any corpus.
For the translation task, we adopt a zero-shot prompting strategy designed to elicit
faithful translations without additional fine-tuning. We use a direct instruction
format, structured as follows:
Translate the following sentence into {lang}. Do not output any other text.
English: {s}
{lang}:
The resulting outputs are evaluated against the corresponding reference translations. Rather than employing a uniform deterministic setting, we utilize model-specific sampling parameters to align with the recommended configurations for each architecture (Table 1). We maintain a consistent limit of 1,024 maximum tokens across all evaluations. For models with specialized reasoning capabilities, we explicitly disabled those modes during inference. Any residual reasoning traces (e.g., <think> blocks) were strictly filtered out during post-processing to ensure consistency.
Model
temp
top_p
top_k
max_tokens
Gemma
1.00
0.95
64
1024
Qwen
0.70
0.80
20
1024
DeepSeek
0.60
0.95
0.0
1024
Llama
0.60
0.90
0.0
1024
Mistral
0.15
1
0.0
1024
Phi
0.80
0.95
0.0
1024
Table 1: Sampling parameters utilized for each model family during evaluation.
Translation quality is assessed using both established surface-level metrics and modern neural evaluation approaches. We employ BLEU (Papineni et al., 2002), which measures n-gram precision between candidate and reference translations, and ChrF++ (Popović, 2017), a character-level F-score metric that also incorporates word n-grams for improved correlation with human judgments. Additionally, we include ROUGE-L (Lin, 2004), which focuses on longest common subsequence matching, and METEOR (Denkowski and Lavie, 2014), which balances precision and recall while accounting for stemming and synonymy. To complement these lexical overlap metrics, we incorporate neural metrics that better capture semantic equivalence: xCOMET (Guerreiro et al., 2024), which combines sentence-level evaluation with fine-grained error detection capabilities, SSA-COMET (Li et al., 2025), an update from AfriCOMET (Wang et al., 2024) using a large human-annotated dataset, and MetricX (Juraska et al., 2024), the Google submission to the WMT 2024 Metrics Shared Task.
This comprehensive evaluation framework allows us to assess both surface-level similarity and deeper semantic preservation across translations.
Figure 2: Aggregated Pearson correlations between MT metrics and multilingual benchmarks across 14 models ranging from 1B to 72B parameters on the Flores-200 dataset. Left: Correlations with Multiple Choice (MC) benchmarks. Right: Correlations with Generative benchmarks. Shaded areas indicate 95% confidence intervals. Red lines represent model-based neural MT metrics, while blue lines represent parametric metrics.
3.3 Benchmarks
We evaluate models across 9 multilingual benchmarks to cover complementary task categories:
Global MMLU: A multilingual extension of the Massive Multitask Language Understanding benchmark, testing factual knowledge and academic reasoning across languages (Hendrycks et al., 2021; Singh et al., 2025). We use the "Lite" variant, which contains of 15 languages with fully human-translated or post-edited content. We use accuracy scores in our analysis.
Belebele: A large-scale reading comprehension benchmark covering 122 languages (Bandarkar et al., 2024). Each task consists of a short passage from the Flores-200 dataset followed by a multiple-choice question. We use accuracy scores in our analysis.
MLQA: A cross-lingual extractive question answering benchmark spanning seven languages and designed in the SQuAD format (Lewis et al., 2020). We use f1 scores from English to target language in our analysis.
MGSM: A multilingual extension of the GSM8K dataset for mathematical reasoning (Cobbe et al., 2021) in ten languages (Shi et al., 2022b). We evaluate in the direct prediction setting, where the model generates a final answer without reasoning steps. We use direct exact match scores in our analysis.
IrokoBench: A benchmark suite for African languages covering 16 low-resource languages (Adelani et al., 2025). It includes adaptations of 3 well-known benchmarks. Due to tooling limitations, AfriMGSM was not included in our evaluation.
•
AfriMMLU: An African language adaptation of MMLU, designed to test reasoning in LRLs. We use direct accuracy scores and Prompt 1 in our analysis.
•
AfriXNLI: A natural language inference dataset for African languages. We use accuracy scores and Prompt 2 in our analysis.
HellaSwag: A commonsense reasoning benchmark originally introduced by Zellers et al. (2019). We use the multilingual version from the Okapi benchmark suite (Lai et al., 2023), which includes 30 machine-translated languages. We use accuracy scores in our analysis.
TruthfulQA: An adversarial benchmark for testing truthfulness and informativeness, originally developed by Lin et al. (2022). We use the MC1 variant from the Okapi suite (Lai et al., 2023). This variant covers 31 machine-translated languages. We use MC2 accuracy scores in our analysis.
INCLUDE: A question answering benchmark emphasizing knowledge and reasoning across 44 languages to assess the capabilities of LLMs within the authentic linguistic contexts in which they are intended to operate (Romanou et al., 2024b). We use default accuracy scores in our analysis.
3.4 Model and Software Infrastructure
All evaluations are conducted on state-of-the-art multilingual LLMs (Table 4 in Appendix). We generate outputs via the vLLM framework, which provides efficient distributed inference with high-throughput decoding Kwon et al. (2023).
Benchmark results are obtained through LM Eval Harness, a standardized framework for large-scale model evaluation Gao et al. (2024). These frameworks increase comparability with prior work and minimize implementation biases.
3.5 Correlation Analysis
To quantify the relationship between translation quality and benchmark performance, we compute both non-parametric and parametric correlation coefficients. Specifically, we report Pearson’s correlation ( r ) to capture linear associations, sensitive to magnitude and direction of variation Pearson (1895). Also, Spearman’s rank correlation ( \rho ): to capture monotonic relationships, robust to non-linearities and outliers Spearman (1961).
Statistical significance is assessed at \alpha=0.05 using two-tailed permutation tests ( N=2000 ). This non-parametric approach is well-suited to our multilingual benchmark data as it remains robust under non-normal distributions and small sample sizes. Correlation coefficients are computed via scipy.stats Virtanen et al. (2020), while significance is determined via random shuffling. To aggregate performance across the fixed population of languages and tasks, we apply Fisher’s z -transformation to normalize correlation coefficients prior to averaging. Reported mean correlations are then derived via inverse transformation, ensuring a statistically rigorous representation of the central tendency.
3.6 Reproducibility and Availability
All experiments were run on NVIDIA H100 GPUs with 80GB memory. Translation and benchmark outputs, evaluation scripts, and correlation analyses are implemented in Python and will be released upon publication to support reproducibility.
4 Results
We analyze the relationship between MT quality and downstream multilingual task performance by computing correlations between 7 MT metrics and 9 multilingual benchmarks across 14 LLMs. This section highlights findings from the Phi-4 (14B) model as a representative case, as it exhibits stable behavior across tasks and metrics. Figure 1 provides a granular view of the Pearson correlation matrix for Phi-4 on FLORES-200, with a complete set of its metric-dataset-benchmark correlations provided in Tables 2 and 6 in the Appendix.
Beyond this individual case, we observe that the correlational strength of translation metrics scales consistently across model sizes. Figure 2 summarizes these aggregated trends, illustrating how the correlation between MT quality and benchmark success persists across the 1B to 72B parameter range. Exhaustive results across the remaining 13 models can be found in Appendix E.
4.1 Overview of Translation-Performance Alignment
Across languages and tasks, translation quality correlates strongly with downstream performance. For most metrics, the median correlation exceeds r=0.80 . Neural metrics are the most consistently correlated: xCOMET achieves a median r=0.91 , MetricX a median r=0.89 , and SSA-COMET a median r=0.87 . This linear relationship is visually apparent in Figure 3 (reading comprehension) and Figure 4 (commonsense reasoning).
Importantly, the relationship does not rely exclusively on neural evaluators. Purely lexical metrics retain substantial correlational strength: BLEU attains a median r=0.79 , with ChrF++ (median r=0.63 ) and ROUGE-L (median r=0.66 ) also remaining informative. The competitive performance of BLEU and ROUGE-L on many benchmark-dataset pairs provides a strong control: it suggests that the correlation signal originates in translation quality itself, rather than idiosyncrasies of learned MT evaluators. Overall, translation quality, regardless of the metric family, emerges as a meaningful proxy for multilingual task performance.
Figure 3: Correlation between translation quality (SSA-COMET) and reading comprehension (Belebele) for Phi-4 across 115 languages. The high coefficients ( r=0.936,\rho=0.943 ) demonstrate a strong linear alignment between translation and NLU tasks.
Figure 4: Correlation between translation quality (xCOMET) and commonsense reasoning (HellaSwag) for Phi-4 across 30 languages. The alignment ( r=0.972,\rho=0.977 ) suggests that the semantic representations required for translation and commonsense reasoning are highly congruent.
We also observe systematic differences by task category. Benchmarks emphasizing semantic understanding and inference show uniformly strong correlations (AfriMMLU: median r=0.92 ; HellaSwag: median r=0.87 ; TruthfulQA: median r=0.76 ). In contrast, tasks requiring more specialized competencies exhibit weaker and more variable alignment (INCLUDE: median r=0.62 ; MGSM: median r=0.72 ; MLQA: median r=0.76 ).
Scaling across model size.
Figure 2 aggregates correlations over all 14 models and shows that translation-benchmark alignment persists across the 1B-72B range (with 95% confidence intervals), indicating that the proxy relationship is not specific to a single architecture or scale.
Figure-based exemplars.
Figure 3 illustrates the correlation between translation quality (SSA-COMET) and reading comprehension (Belebele) for Phi-4 across 115 languages, with high coefficients ( r=0.936 , \rho=0.943 ), indicating strong linear and rank alignment between translation and NLU performance. Figure 4 shows a similarly strong relationship between translation quality (xCOMET) and commonsense reasoning (HellaSwag) for Phi-4 across 30 languages ( r=0.972 , \rho=0.977 ), consistent with highly shared semantic representations.
4.2 Task-Based Analysis
We next break down alignment by benchmark family to characterize where translation quality is most (and least) efficacious, and how this depends on metric choice and translation dataset.
4.2.1 Knowledge and Academic Reasoning
Global MMLU and AfriMMLU both show strong alignment between MT quality and benchmark performance, but with clear metric dependence. On Global MMLU, neural metrics are consistently strongest: xCOMET and SSA-COMET achieve correlations above 0.92 across datasets. AfriMMLU also exhibits high alignment across nearly all metrics, in part due to its limited data points. Traditional lexical metrics are more mixed: BLEU remains moderately to strongly correlated on both benchmarks, whereas METEOR and ROUGE-L degrade notably on Global MMLU, particularly on FLORES-200.
4.2.2 Natural Language Understanding
Belebele displays high translation-benchmark alignment (median r=0.83 ).
Neural metrics are consistently strong (e.g., MetricX r=0.71{-}0.92 , SSA-COMET r=0.85{-}0.94 , xCOMET r=0.83{-}0.93 ), while overlap metrics can be substantially lower on WMT24++ (e.g., ChrF++ r=0.44 and BLEU r=0.69 on WMT24++, versus ChrF++ r=0.77{-}0.85 and BLEU r=0.86{-}0.89 on FLORES-200/NTREX; Table 2).
MLQA (median r=0.76 ) shows the largest spread across metrics, including the lowest correlation reported in Table 2 (METEOR on FLORES-200: r=0.26 ).
In contrast, MetricX is consistently high on MLQA ( r=0.93{-}0.98 ).
AfriXNLI has a lower median (median r=0.72 ) and notable metric sensitivity: on FLORES-200 and NTREX, SSA-COMET is comparatively low ( r=0.42 and r=0.37 , respectively), while other metrics remain substantially higher (e.g., MetricX r=0.74{-}0.79 ; Table 2).
4.2.3 Specialized Reasoning
HellaSwag shows strong alignment (median r=0.87 ), with neural metrics consistently high (e.g., xCOMET r=0.97{-}0.98 ) and even lexical metrics remaining informative (e.g., BLEU r=0.87{-}0.90 ; Table 2).
MGSM exhibits weaker and more metric-dependent correlations (median r=0.72 ).
Notably, ROUGE-L is strongest for MGSM across datasets ( r=0.78{-}0.81 ), while MetricX is comparatively lower ( r=0.64{-}0.65 ).
INCLUDE shows the weakest median correlation (median r=0.62 ), with neural metrics providing the strongest signal (e.g., xCOMET r=0.73{-}0.78 , MetricX r=0.68{-}0.71 ) and overlap-based metrics generally lower (e.g., ChrF++ r=0.34{-}0.56 ; Table 2).
4.3 Metric and Dataset Insights
4.3.1 Neural Metrics Performance
Neural MT metrics are the most reliable indicators overall (median r=0.87{-}0.91 ; Table 2).
Within this family, xCOMET is the strongest aggregate indicator (median r=0.91 ), while MetricX is particularly strong on MLQA ( r=0.93{-}0.98 ) and remains competitive elsewhere.
SSA-COMET is highly correlated on many benchmarks (e.g., Belebele: r=0.85{-}0.94 ; TruthfulQA: r=0.85{-}0.92 ), but can be substantially lower on AfriXNLI under FLORES-200/NTREX ( r=0.42/0.37 ).
4.3.2 Traditional Metrics Show Performance
Among overlap-based metrics, BLEU is the most robust aggregate baseline (median r=0.79 ) and performs strongly on several benchmarks (e.g., HellaSwag: r=0.87{-}0.90 ; TruthfulQA: r=0.70{-}0.79 ).
However, overlap metrics exhibit larger task sensitivity: ROUGE-L is unusually strong on MGSM ( r=0.78{-}0.81 ), whereas METEOR can be very weak on MLQA ( r=0.26 on FLORES-200; Table 2).
4.3.3 Dataset Effects
Across FLORES-200, WMT24++, and NTREX, the high-level pattern is stable: neural metrics dominate, and benchmarks such as Belebele and HellaSwag show strong alignment.
At the same time, correlations for some benchmark-metric pairs are substantially lower on WMT24++ (e.g., for Belebele under ChrF++/BLEU/MetricX/xCOMET; Table 2), consistent with domain and coverage differences across translation datasets.
5 Conclusion
Comprehensive multilingual evaluation remains fundamentally bottlenecked by benchmark availability: for most of the world’s languages, there are no reliable, non-machine-translated task suites, and translating existing benchmarks introduces well-known validity issues.
This work asks whether translation quality, measured on high-coverage parallel corpora, can serve as a scalable, low-cost proxy signal for a model’s broader multilingual competence.
We answer this question with a large correlation study spanning 14 multilingual LLMs (1B–72B parameters), 9 multilingual benchmarks, 3 translation datasets (FLORES-200, WMT24++, NTREX), and 7 MT evaluation metrics.
Across this setting, translation quality is strongly indicative of downstream benchmark performance: neural MT metrics yield high median Pearson correlations, with xCOMET (median r=0.91 ), MetricX (median r=0.89 ), and SSA-COMET (median r=0.87 ).
Importantly, the relationship is not confined to learned evaluators: even overlap-based metrics remain informative (e.g., BLEU median r=0.79 ), indicating that the proxy signal is grounded in translation performance itself.
The strength of this alignment persists across model sizes, supporting translation evaluation as a stable first-pass indicator rather than a model-specific artifact.
At the same time, our results clarify the boundary of what translation can proxy.
Correlation strength varies by task family, and correlations are weaker for some specialized benchmarks (e.g., INCLUDE and MGSM), indicating that translation quality cannot replace task-specific evaluation when the target application depends on competencies not well captured by translation.
We therefore view translation not as a substitute for multilingual benchmarks, but as a practical screening layer: translation-first evaluation can rapidly surface where models are likely to succeed (or fail) across many languages, enabling targeted downstream benchmarking where it is most needed.
Beyond methodological innovation, this work has practical and ethical implications.
By turning translation evaluation into a first-pass measurement tool, it offers a blueprint for expanding evaluation reach far beyond the small set of languages covered by high-quality, non-translated benchmarks.
In particular, translation-based proxies could help communities and researchers obtain meaningful, comparable signals of multilingual model competence at a fraction of the cost of building and running task suites, supporting fairer and more inclusive progress in multilingual language technology.
Ultimately, our results suggest that broad multilingual assessment may benefit less from endlessly expanding task suites, and more from rethinking what evaluation can be at scale.
Translation, the act of comprehending and re-expressing meaning across linguistic boundaries, serves here as both a scientific lens and a practical tool: it is widely available, cheap to run, and empirically linked to downstream success across many benchmarks, while still leaving clear cases where targeted task evaluation is necessary.
By grounding evaluation in translation quality through a staged, translation-first framework, we move toward a more scalable evaluation ecosystem in which more languages can be meaningfully measured (and therefore improved), without overstating translation as a complete substitute for task-centric benchmarks.
6 Limitations
While our results provide strong evidence that translation quality can serve as a useful first-pass proxy for multilingual performance, several limitations constrain the scope and interpretation of this study.
Translation datasets are curated and do not span all real-world language use.
Our proxy signals are computed on FLORES-200, WMT24++, and NTREX, which are high-quality, reference-based parallel corpora.
These datasets primarily cover standardized written text and may under-represent dialectal variation, informal registers, code-switching, and domain-specific language.
As a result, strong translation-benchmark correlations on these corpora do not guarantee equivalent correlation in more diverse, community-specific, or conversational settings.
MT metrics introduce measurement bias, especially for low-resource languages.
We rely on both lexical metrics and neural MT evaluators (xCOMET, SSA-COMET, MetricX).
Neural metrics are trained to align with human judgments and can be sensitive to the distribution and language coverage of their training data.
Therefore, MT scores may partially reflect metric-specific biases rather than pure underlying model competence, particularly for languages and scripts that are under-represented in the metric training signal.
The fact that overlap metrics remain informative mitigates (but does not eliminate) this concern.
The proxy is incomplete: some tasks depend on competencies not well captured by translation.
Translation quality is an indirect signal of multilingual capability.
Our own results show weaker median correlations on several benchmarks (e.g., INCLUDE and MGSM; Table 2), indicating that translation cannot replace task-centric evaluation when downstream success is gated by specialized reasoning, task format constraints, or domain-specific knowledge.
Consequently, we frame translation as a screening layer, not as a universal substitute for multilingual benchmarks.
Language overlap is sparse, yielding small sample sizes for some correlations.
Correlation estimates are computed only over the intersection of languages supported by each translation dataset and each benchmark.
This overlap is uneven across tasks and corpora (e.g., some WMT24++ correlations use as few as n=3 languages; Table 2), which can make estimates statistically fragile and inflate the apparent strength of association.
Similarly, some benchmarks have limited language coverage in our evaluation setup, restricting the stability and generality of per-benchmark conclusions.
Experimental scope: models, prompting, and translation direction.
We evaluate 14 instruction-tuned LLMs across several model families, but the findings may not transfer to all architectures, pretraining mixes, or decoding regimes.
Translation is elicited via a single, direct, zero-shot prompt and evaluated for English-to-target translation; correlations could differ under alternative prompting strategies, decoding settings, or translation directions.
We also disable explicit “reasoning modes” where applicable and filter any residual traces during post-processing; while this improves consistency, it may not reflect how such models are deployed in practice.
Correlational evidence does not establish causation; contamination cannot be fully ruled out.
Our analysis quantifies association, not mechanism: high translation quality and high downstream performance may co-occur due to shared representations, shared training data, or other confounds.
Because model training corpora are not fully disclosed, we cannot definitively rule out data contamination for either benchmarks or translation test sets.
We mitigate this concern through breadth (multiple datasets, metrics, tasks, and model families) and statistical testing, but controlled causal studies would be needed to establish why translation quality influences downstream success.
Despite these limitations, our results provide a clear empirical foundation: translation metrics can substantially reduce the cost and coverage gap in multilingual evaluation. Future work should extend this approach to low-resource settings, non-standard text types, and causally controlled training regimes to better understand the boundaries of translation as a universal evaluator.
ENDSOURCE


SOURCE https://arxiv.org/html/2601.12193v1
VIRTUE: Versatile Video Retrieval Through Unified Embeddings
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2601.12193v1 [cs.CV] 17 Jan 2026
VIRTUE: Versatile Video Retrieval Through Unified Embeddings
Shaunak Halbe
Bhagyashree Puranik
Jayakrishnan Unnikrishnan
††thanks: Work done during an internship at Amazon.
Affiliation: Georgia Institute of Technology
Affiliation: Amazonshalbe9@gatech.edu, {bpuranik, jayunn, tkushan, vimalb, paragto}@amazon.com
Kushan Thakkar
Vimal Bhat
Toufiq Parag
Affiliation: Amazonshalbe9@gatech.edu, {bpuranik, jayunn, tkushan, vimalb, paragto}@amazon.com
Abstract
Modern video retrieval systems are expected to handle diverse tasks ranging from corpus-level retrieval and fine-grained moment localization to flexible multimodal querying. Specialized architectures achieve strong retrieval performance by training modality-specific encoders on massive datasets, but they lack the ability to process composed multimodal queries. In contrast, multimodal LLM (MLLM)-based methods support rich multimodal search but their retrieval performance remains well below that of specialized systems. We present VIRTUE, an MLLM-based versatile video retrieval framework that integrates corpus and moment-level retrieval capabilities while accommodating composed multimodal queries within a single architecture. We use contrastive alignment of visual and textual embeddings generated using a shared MLLM backbone to facilitate efficient embedding-based candidate search. Our embedding model, trained efficiently using low-rank adaptation (LoRA) on 700 K paired visual-text data samples, surpasses other MLLM-based methods on zero-shot video retrieval tasks. Additionally, we demonstrate that the same model can be adapted without further training to achieve competitive results on zero-shot moment retrieval, and state of the art results for zero-shot composed video retrieval. With additional training for reranking candidates identified in the embedding-based search, our model substantially outperforms existing MLLM-based retrieval systems and achieves retrieval performance comparable to state of the art specialized models which are trained on orders of magnitude larger data.
1 Introduction
Method
Unified
Re-
Moment
Composed
Embed.
ranking
Retr.
Video Retr.
InternVideo2
✗
✓
✗
✗
LamRA
✓
✓
✗
\diamond
CaRe
✓
✗
✗
\diamond
Chat-VTG
✗
✗
✓
✗
VIRTUE
✓
✓
✓
✓
MLLM
Video contra-
No multi-task
based method
stive learning
data needed
LamRA
✗
✗
CaRe
✓
✗
VLM2Vec
✗
✗
VIRTUE
✓
✓
Figure 1: VIRTUE supports corpus-level retrieval with reranking, zero-shot composed video retrieval, and zero-shot moment localization within a single architecture. The tables (left) highlight that VIRTUE uniquely offers unified embeddings and versatile capabilities without relying on multi-task instruction tuning. \diamond indicates models that, while architecturally capable of processing multimodal inputs, have not demonstrated composed video retrieval capability.
Video content constitutes the majority of internet data today, creating a demand for effective and scalable search strategies that enable users to discover relevant content. As video collections continue to expand in size and diversity, retrieval systems must accommodate increasingly complex and fine-grained user specifications. It is desirable that an effective video retrieval framework handle diverse retrieval scenarios, such as (a) corpus-level retrieval, which identifies relevant videos from a large collection via dense embedding search followed by an optional re-ranking stage; (b) composed multimodal querying, where users can issue queries combining multiple modalities—text, images, or videos—to express complex intent (e.g., “find videos like \langle this clip \rangle , but set in a snowy environment” as in Figure 1); and (c) moment retrieval, which localizes the precise temporal segment within a video that matches a natural-language query (e.g., “the flight takes off” as in Figure 1). These capabilities form the foundation for intelligent, flexible, and user-centric video search and recommendation systems [41, 15].
Early video retrieval models typically employed modality-specific encoders with intermediate or late fusion to align video and text representations [4, 3, 27]. These encoders produce embeddings for different modalities in a shared embedding space which enables cross-modal retrieval. Specialized architectures such as InternVideo2 [43] push this paradigm to scale, training on hundreds of millions of paired examples across video, image and audio, to achieve strong text-to-video retrieval performance. However, since these systems rely on separate modality-specific encoders, they cannot natively process composed queries that combine multiple input modalities.
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have gained significant attention due to their ability to jointly process visual and textual information [20, 2, 51, 24]. Recent efforts have adapted MLLMs for retrieval tasks via contrastive learning to produce unified embeddings [25, 50, 17, 16]. A common recipe for adapting these models involves training on diverse data mixtures spanning a variety of tasks such as visual question answering, captioning, retrieval and grounding. Some works further incorporate an instruction tuning stage [25, 47] to improve vision-language alignment. These approaches prioritize generalization, aiming to enable flexible retrieval across many modalities including images, text, and multimodal documents. However, while extensible to video retrieval, this broad focus comes at a cost: such models considerably underperform specialized approaches like InternVideo2 on standard corpus-level video retrieval benchmarks [45, 12].
In parallel, MLLMs have also been adapted for moment retrieval. Some recent approaches fine-tune MLLMs with temporal annotation data [26, 28], while others generate video captions to obtain temporal proposals [33] or introduce architectural modifications in the form of temporal processing modules [32]. However these two lines of work remain disconnected. To our knowledge, no single architecture simultaneously delivers strong corpus-level video retrieval, performs zero-shot composed video retrieval, and enables zero-shot moment localization without sacrificing performance compared to task-specific models.
In this paper, we propose VIRTUE, a unified MLLM-based video retrieval framework that jointly supports corpus-level retrieval with reranking, composed multimodal querying, and moment localization. Unlike prior multi-objective or instruction-tuned methods [25, 50, 17], our approach follows a retrieval-centric design centered on contrastive alignment between visual and textual inputs.
We repurpose the final hidden state corresponding to the MLLM’s end-of-sequence (EOS) token as a unified embedding for both queries and videos through contrastive alignment. We fine-tune low-rank adapters to produce embeddings and term this model VIRTUE-Embed. We subsequently train a reranker (termed VIRTUE-Ranker), relying upon the same backbone and including a linear projection head that predicts a matching score between [0,1] (as opposed to generating “Yes/No” responses [25]) for query–video pairs. Despite its simplicity, our framework generalizes across tasks without architectural changes or task-specific supervision.
Importantly, the contrastively aligned embeddings themselves (before the reranker) serve as effective retrieval representations, achieving competitive performance relative to prior embedding models. Relying only on simple vision–text training we achieve competitive results approaching the accuracy of methods trained using additional modalities like audio [43, 9].
Empirically, VIRTUE achieves text-to-video retrieval performance on par with specialized architectures, while substantially outperforming prior MLLM-based methods on MSR-VTT [45], DiDeMo [12] and MSVD [7] test sets. Notably, our model even surpasses the state of the art (SOTA) approach [43] on DiDeMo [12] for zero-shot text-to-video retrieval. It further achieves SOTA zero-shot composed video retrieval on CoVR [41] test set, strongly surpassing the best performing approach [39], and demonstrates strong zero-shot moment retrieval performance on Charades-STA [11] and ActivityNet-Captions [19].
Our main contributions are as follows:
(i) we introduce VIRTUE, a versatile MLLM-based framework that handles corpus-level retrieval with reranking, fine-grained moment localization, and composed multimodal querying within a single architecture;
(ii) we demonstrate that contrastive alignment on video–text data substantially improves MLLM-based embedding quality for retrieval, outperforming multi-objective or instruction-tuned approaches;
(iii) VIRTUE achieves text-to-video retrieval performance comparable to specialized systems such as InternVideo2, despite not training on audio, while supporting composed queries that such systems cannot process;
(iv) our contrastively trained embedding model demonstrates strong emergent capability on unseen tasks, achieving state of the art results on zero-shot composed video retrieval (CoVR) and strong performance on zero-shot moment retrieval.
2 Related Work
2.1 Corpus-level video retrieval
Prior works on text-to-video and video-to-text retrieval typically employ dual-encoder approaches [30, 29] trained using contrastive learning on text-video pairs. Query embeddings generated by the encoders are used for dense vector search followed by an optional re-ranking stage. Methods such as CLIP4Clip [27] and others [4, 3] extend CLIP [34] by transferring image-text alignment to video by applying frame-level encoders followed by late-fusion aggregation, but still preserve separate modality streams. Recent works like VidLA [36], GRAM [9] and InternVideo2 [43] pursue stronger multimodal alignment and large-scale training strongly boosting benchmark performance in both fine-tuned and zero-shot settings.
A variant of traditional video retrieval is the recently proposed composed video retrieval task [41] in which the query is in the form of a video along with a desired modification. Prior solutions use adaptations of the BLIP [21] model to tackle this task.
2.2 Multimodal Large Language Models
MLLMs connect vision encoders to large language models through lightweight adapters [1, 20, 24] or visual expert modules [42, 8], achieving strong performance on a broad range of vision-language tasks. Recent models like Qwen2.5-VL [2] demonstrate enhanced multimodal reasoning with native video processing capabilities for extended sequences. These advances have driven widespread adoption of MLLMs across diverse applications, particularly in video understanding tasks where their ability to process temporal context and composed queries opens new possibilities for video-language modeling.
Figure 2: VIRTUE-Embed uses the final hidden state of the EOS token as an embedding anchor, and aligns visual content and text descriptions through contrastive learning.
2.3 MLLMs as unified embedding models
As MLLMs are primarily designed for generation and question-answering, they cannot natively generate embeddings for retrieval. Nevertheless their unified representation space makes them natural candidates for retrieval applications. Recent works have explored adapting MLLMs as unified embedding models through contrastive learning. E5-V [16] demonstrates this potential by fine-tuning LLaVA on text-only natural language inference (NLI) data for cross-modal retrieval. GME [50] achieves stronger performance by training Qwen-2VL on a mixture of image-text data, while subsequent approaches such as LaMRA [25], VLM2Vec [17], and CaRe [47] improve on this through refined data mixtures, modality-specific curation, and hard negative mining strategies. However, these methods predominantly target image and document retrieval, with limited exploration of video-specific capabilities.
2.4 MLLMs for moment retrieval
Recent MLLM-based works address video moment retrieval with varying degrees of specialization. TimeChat [35] achieves zero-shot temporal grounding through instruction tuning on diverse temporal tasks with timestamp-aware encoding. Training-free approaches like ChatVTG [33] rely on external MLLMs to generate multi-perspective captions for semantic matching. HawkEye [44] and Momenter [32] construct large-scale datasets with segment-level temporal annotations to enable text-to-text grounding and fine-grained temporal reasoning. In contrast, we demonstrate our simple, zero-shot pipeline that matches the performance of these specialized approaches without requiring task-specific modifications, external captioning models, or query reformulation.
While prior methods have bespoke MLLM-based solutions for various retrieval tasks, in this work we address the full spectrum of video retrieval, including corpus-level search, moment-level localization and composed video retrieval.
3 Method
We propose VIRTUE (Versatile vIdeo Retrieval Through Unified Embeddings), a versatile MLLM-based framework for video retrieval that addresses multiple tasks including corpus-level retrieval, moment localization, and composed video retrieval without needing task-specific modifications. We adapt a MLLM backbone to produce unified embeddings for retrieval through contrastive learning. As detailed in Section 3.1, we adopt a two-stage contrastive training scheme on relatively small datasets to effectively learn multimodal representations for video retrieval. This approach is simpler than the training recipes on multi-task data mixtures employed by prior methods [17, 25].
Our training strategy first adapts the MLLM with image-text data, followed by video-text training. This design is motivated by recent studies demonstrating that semantic representations learned from images provide strong priors for video understanding [46, 38]. This yields our VIRTUE-Embed model, which we use to obtain candidate videos for corpus-level retrieval, enable composed video retrieval, and perform zero-shot moment localization. For corpus-level retrieval, we refine the initial candidates obtained from VIRTUE-Embed through a re-ranking stage, which we term VIRTUE-Ranker. In contrast to existing strategies [25], we formulate our re-ranker as a video-query matching problem and train a classification head on the EOS output embedding from the MLLM to predict a confidence score in range of [0,1] for each video-query pair. Section 3.2 details our re-ranking method, including the different negative-example sampling and relevance scoring strategies we employ. Beyond corpus-level retrieval, VIRTUE-Embed directly supports moment localization (Section 3.3) and composed video retrieval (Section 3.4) in a zero-shot manner, requiring neither additional architectural modifications nor task-specific fine-tuning.
3.1 VIRTUE-Embed: Contrastive Visual Embedding Learning
MLLMs are typically trained for autoregressive text generation. We adapt them for producing representation embeddings by utilizing the final hidden state of the end-of-sequence (EOS) token as an embedding anchor. The causal attention mechanism in the LLM ensures that this token attends to the full multimodal context, capturing a global summary of the input.
Contrastive objective. We use the same model to encode both candidates and text queries in separate forward passes, as illustrated in Figure 2. For each modality, we append a prompt instruction to summarize the content into one word, followed by the EOS token. Let q_{i} denote the embedding of a query and c_{i} denote the embedding of its paired candidate. We train using the InfoNCE loss [40] to train the model as follows:
\mathcal{L}_{\text{InfoNCE}}=-\log\frac{\exp(\text{sim}(q_{i},c_{i})/\tau)}{\sum_{j=1}^{N}\exp(\text{sim}(q_{i},c_{j})/\tau)}
(1)
where \text{sim}(\cdot,\cdot) denotes cosine similarity, \tau is the temperature parameter, and N is the batch size. For efficient adaptation, we use LoRA [13] adapters within attention and projection layers while keeping the base model weights frozen.
Two-stage training strategy. We first train the MLLM backbone on image-caption pairs to establish vision-language alignment, then fine-tune on video-text description pairs. The image-text dataset (CC-595K) provides broad concept coverage and enables efficient vision-language alignment. We then fine-tune on a relatively small video-text dataset (PEVideo) to adapt the model to video data. In stage 1, the visual input consists of a single image, while in stage 2, we use uniformly sampled video frames. Through this two-stage contrastive alignment of EOS embeddings across modalities, the model learns a unified representation space suitable for multimodal video retrieval.
3.2 VIRTUE-Ranker: Candidate Refinement
Figure 3: VIRTUE-Ranker re-scores each query–video pair by feeding them jointly through the MLLM and projecting the EOS hidden state to a pointwise matching score.
Once trained with the two-stage contrastive strategy, VIRTUE-Embed can be used at inference time to retrieve an initial set of candidates by computing cosine similarities between the query embedding and all video embeddings in the corpus. While this embedding-based retrieval enables efficient search over large collections, it relies on fixed-dimensional representations that may not fully capture the semantic complexity of video content. To address this, we introduce a re-ranking stage that operates on the top- K retrieved candidates. Unlike the initial retrieval, which requires scalability to millions of videos, re-ranking processes a small candidate set, enabling fine-grained cross-modal interaction.
We formulate re-ranking as a pointwise binary matching problem between a query q and each candidate c . Each query-candidate pair is jointly processed by the MLLM. We initialize a linear projection head and pass the final hidden state of the EOS token through it to predict a confidence score s_{\theta}(q,c) in [0,1] , where 1 indicates a correct match. During training, we optimize both the linear projection head and the LoRA adapters in LLM self-attention and projection layers, while keeping the base model weights frozen. We train this stage exclusively on video-text pairs. At inference, candidates are re-ranked according to their predicted confidence scores.
Negative sampling strategies.
Training the re-ranker requires both positive (matching) and negative (non-matching) query-candidate pairs. We investigate two negative sampling strategies for this:
•
Random negative sampling: For each query, we randomly sample non-matching targets from the training set.
•
Hard negative mining: For each query, we first retrieve the top- K candidates using our VIRTUE-Embed model and sample non-matching targets from this set. Since these hard negatives share semantic similarity with the query, this encourages the model to learn fine-grained discriminative features.
Training objectives. Equipped with this, we consider two learning strategies:
•
Version 1 (BCE with random negatives):
We assign labels of 0 to the sampled (random negative, query) pairs and 1 to the (ground truth target, query) pairs and optimize using the Binary Cross Entropy (BCE) objective. This serves as the simplest instantiation of our re-ranker.
•
Version 2 (Joint objective):
To provide stronger training signals, we leverage both random and hard negatives through a combined objective. We first apply BCE loss to both random and hard negatives with binary labels.
However, BCE treats all negatives equally with a fixed label of 0, which can be suboptimal when hard negatives exhibit partial semantic alignment with the query and forcing the model to assign them scores of 0 may conflict with their actual relevance. To address this, we augment the BCE loss with a preference-based objective following the Bradley-Terry formulation [6]. Rather than enforcing absolute relevance scores, we optimize for correct relative ordering between ground-truth and negative pairs. For a given query q , ground-truth target c_{gt} , and negative candidate c_{neg} , the loss is:
\mathcal{L}_{\rm PB}=-\log\sigma\!\bigl(s_{\theta}(q,c_{\rm gt})-s_{\theta}(q,c_{\rm neg})\bigr)
(2)
This objective directly follows from the aim of preferring the ground truth target to the mined negative. It encourages s_{\theta}(q,c_{\rm gt})>s_{\theta}(q,c_{\rm neg}) enabling the model to rank partially relevant negatives below ground-truth matches without forcing on absolute relevance scores. The complete joint objective is:
\mathcal{L}=\lambda_{1}\mathcal{L}_{\text{BCE-rand}}+\lambda_{2}\mathcal{L}_{\text{BCE-hard}}+\lambda_{3}\mathcal{L}_{\text{PB}},
(3)
where \lambda_{i} control the relative contribution of each component, and \mathcal{L}_{\text{BCE-rand}} , \mathcal{L}_{\text{BCE-hard}} are BCE losses computed on (query, negative) pairs, where negatives are randomly sampled or mined respectively. \mathcal{L}_{\text{PB}} operates on (query, ground-truth target, mined negative) triplets to enforce correct relative ordering. This combined formulation allows a more fine-grained precision by leveraging complementary supervision signals.
3.3 Zero-shot Moment Retrieval
For moment retrieval, the objective is to localize the temporal segment (start and end timestamps) within a video that corresponds to a natural language query. Unlike corpus-level retrieval which identifies relevant videos from a large collection, moment retrieval requires fine-grained temporal localization within a single video. We approach this task in a zero-shot manner, leveraging only the contrastively trained embedding model (VIRTUE-Embed), without any moment-specific training or architectural modifications.
Our approach operates by first computing dense frame-level similarity scores between the query and temporally sampled video clips, then identifying high-confidence temporal regions through peak detection. We uniformly sample frames from the video and encode each frame individually using VIRTUE-Embed. The query text is encoded once, and we compute cosine similarity between the query embedding and each frame embedding, producing a temporal similarity curve s(t) where t is the frame index. We apply Gaussian smoothing to reduce noise, producing \tilde{s}(t) , then identify candidate moments by detecting peaks that exceed a threshold defined as \mu+\beta\sigma , where \mu and \sigma are the mean and standard deviation of \tilde{s}(t) . For each detected peak at frame t_{p} , we determine the temporal extent by expanding left and right until the similarity falls below \tilde{s}(t_{p})-(1-\alpha)(\tilde{s}(t_{p})-\mu) , where \alpha controls the window tightness around peaks. We apply temporal Non-Maximum Suppression (NMS) to eliminate redundant overlapping candidates, retaining only the highest-scoring non-overlapping windows.
3.4 Zero-shot Composed Video Retrieval
Although VIRTUE-Embed is trained primarily on video and paired text-only data, the underlying MLLM supports encoding multimodal inputs, including text combined with video as an interleaved sequence. The ability to query composed modalities emerges from the MLLM’s joint representation space and multimodal reasoning abilities, enabling retrieval scenarios not explicitly encountered during training. We address this task in a purely zero-shot regime without exposure to any composed multimodal training examples, demonstrating our model’s ability to generalize to complex multimodal queries. To process composed queries, we construct the input by concatenating: (1) the source video, (2) the modification text, (3) an instruction prompting the model to encode the semantic change the source video would undergo under the modification, and (4) the EOS token. The resulting embedding serves as the composed query representation. We then retrieve the target video by computing the argmax over cosine similarities between this query embedding and all video embeddings in the corpus.
4 Experimental Analysis
4.1 Text-to-Video Retrieval
4.1.1 Training Details
Contrastive Learning: We use the 7B parameter variant of Qwen-VL 2.5 as the backbone and finetune LoRA adapters on its projection layers and LLM blocks with the number of trainable parameters being approximately 48 M. The corpus-level training follows a two-stage setup designed to align representations across modalities. Stage 1 is trained on image-text pairs from CC 595K, a balanced subset of Conceptual Captions 3M [37]. This dataset provides broad concept coverage and enables the model to learn general-purpose visual-text alignment. Stage 2 is trained on 105 K video-text pairs from PEVideo [5], focusing on temporal alignment between short video clips and their corresponding captions. The video-text pairs in PEVideo are sourced from the Segment Anything corpus, consisting of real-world, in-the-wild video clips. Stage 1 is trained for 3 epochs, and Stage 2 for 1 epoch. We use gradient accumulation with a step size of 4 and a per-device batch size of 64 for stage 1 (images) and 8 for stage 2 (videos), resulting in effective global batch sizes of 2048 and 256 respectively. To make training computationally feasible for video inputs, we enable gradient checkpointing.
Re-ranking: For candidate re-ranking, we train the same backbone on PEVideo using training strategies discussed in Section 3.2 for 1 epoch. For VIRTUE v1, we use 3 random negatives per positive sample in the training set. For VIRTUE v2, we sample 1 random negative, 1 mined negative for BCE-hard and 1 mined negative for the preference-based objective. To obtain the mined negatives, we retrieve the top- 50 candidates from the dataset per query using the corpus-level model (VIRTUE-Embed) and sample from the range [5,50] , following the practice of Top- K shifted by N [10]. We set \lambda_{1} , \lambda_{2} and \lambda_{3} as 0.5 , 0.2 and 0.3 respectively.
Table 1: Zero-shot Retrieval on MSR-VTT 1K test set. Bold indicates the best and underline the second-best result per column. Among single retrieval-stage models, VIRTUE-Embed achieves the best performance. Dual-stage VIRTUE demonstrates competitive performance.
Model
T→V
V→T
R@1
R@5
R@1
R@5
Single retrieval-stage CLIP-based models
Long-CLIP L/14 [49]
40.9
65.5
36.2
62.2
LanguageBind [52]
42.1
65.9
40.1
65.4
Single retrieval-stage MLLM-based models
VLM2Vec 7B [17]
43.5
–
–
–
CaRe 7B [47]
43.9
67.0
41.7
68.1
VIRTUE-Embed 7B (Ours)
46.8
70.8
42.6
65.8
Dual retrieval-stage models
LamRA 7B [25]
44.7
68.6
–
–
InternVideo2 6B [43]
55.9
78.3
53.7
77.5
VIRTUE v1 7B (Ours)
52.4
76.0
47.0
69.9
VIRTUE v2 7B (Ours)
55.3
76.6
46.3
70.7
Table 2: Zero-shot Retrieval on DiDeMo test set. VIRTUE provides SOTA T→V retrieval, while VIRTUE-Embed is the best among single retrieval-stage models.
Model
T→V
V→T
R@1
R@5
R@1
R@5
Single retrieval-stage CLIP-based models
Long-CLIP L/14 [49]
32.4
56.2
28.5
54.1
LanguageBind [52]
35.6
63.6
35.6
62.8
Single retrieval-stage MLLM-based models
CaRe 7B [47]
41.4
68.5
39.1
66.0
VIRTUE-Embed 7B (Ours)
46.6
70.8
42.2
68.5
Dual retrieval-stage models
InternVideo2 6B [43]
57.9
80.0
57.1
79.9
VIRTUE v1 7B (Ours)
58.8
81.0
52.5
79.0
VIRTUE v2 7B (Ours)
56.4
80.4
47.0
75.8
4.1.2 Evaluation
We evaluate our approach on retrieval tasks in a zero-shot setting on the test splits of MSR-VTT, DiDeMo, and MSVD. Following standard protocol, we use one caption per video and report Recall@ 1 , 5 , and 10 for both text-to-video and video-to-text retrieval, except for MSVD where the standard protocol for video-to-text retrieval accounts for multiple possible captions per video. For dual retrieval-stage evaluation, we first retrieve the top-50 candidates for each test query using VIRTUE-Embed through cosine similarity search. We then apply VIRTUE-Ranker to these candidates and re-rank them according to the predicted confidence scores to produce the final ranking. For single retrieval-stage evaluation, we rank candidates directly using the cosine similarities from VIRTUE-Embed.
4.1.3 Results
Table 3: Zero-shot Retrieval on MSVD test set.
Model
T→V
V→T
R@1
R@5
R@1
R@5
Single retrieval-stage CLIP-based models
Long-CLIP L/14 [49]
46.5
73.5
69.3
86.0
LanguageBind [52]
50.0
77.7
75.1
90
Single retrieval-stage MLLM-based models
VLM2Vec 7B [17]
49.5
–
–
–
VIRTUE-Embed 7B (Ours)
49.8
77.6
73.4
87.0
Dual retrieval-stage models
LamRA 7B [25]
52.4
79.8
–
–
InternVideo2 6B [43]
59.3
84.4
83.1
94.2
VIRTUE v2 7B (Ours)
57.8
82.2
79.0
90.1
Table 4: Zero-Shot Text + Video → Video Retrieval on CoVR test set. VIRTUE-Embed sets a new state of the art across all metrics.
Model Name
R@1
R@5
R@10
COVR-BLIP [41]
45.46
70.46
79.54
Thawakar et. al [39]
47.52
72.18
82.37
VIRTUE-Embed 7B (Ours)
55.49
79.41
86.26
We evaluate our approach on zero-shot video-text retrieval across three benchmarks: MSR-VTT [45], DiDeMo [12], and MSVD [7]. Results are presented in Tabs. 1, 2 and 3 for both text-to-video (T2V) and video-to-text (V2T) retrieval. We compare models under two configurations: single retrieval-stage models that perform retrieval solely through embedding-based similarity search, and dual retrieval-stage models that refine initial candidates through an additional re-ranking or image-text relevance matching.
Single retrieval-stage results. Our VIRTUE-Embed model, which performs retrieval through embedding-based lookup, consistently outperforms other MLLM-based approaches including VLM2Vec [17] and CaRe [47] across all benchmarks. On MSR-VTT, VIRTUE-Embed achieves 46.8% R@1 for T2V retrieval, outperforming CaRe by 2.9 percentage points. Similar gains are observed on other datasets, demonstrating the effectiveness of our two-stage contrastive training strategy.
Dual retrieval-stage results. We evaluate the two variants of our dual-stage system termed VIRTUE v1 and VIRTUE v2(Section 3.2). Both variants retrieve top- K candidates using VIRTUE-Embed and refine them through the respective re-ranker. Our approach substantially outperforms LamRA [25], another MLLM-based dual-stage method on MSR-VTT with achieving +10.6 points over LamRA (T2V R@1), and +5.4 points on MSVD. Notably, our approach is also competitive with InternVideo2 [43], a specialized video retrieval model trained on {\sim}400 M samples spanning images, videos, text, and audio that incorporates a query-candidate pairwise matching head. On DiDeMo, our model surpasses InternVideo2 by 0.9 points on T2V R@1, while being within 0.6 points on MSR-VTT. For V2T retrieval, our method trails InternVideo2 by 4-7 points on R@1 across benchmarks, though it outperforms other MLLM-based approaches. Critically, we achieve this competitive performance using only {\sim}700 K adaptation samples, out of which only {\sim}105 K samples are videos.
Table 5: Zero-shot video moment localization results on Charades-STA and ActivityNet Captions. “Train Samples” indicates the number of temporal annotation pairs (time intervals and language queries) used during training. † trained on raw videos from these datasets albeit without annotations. Our approach represents pure zero-shot performance requiring no temporal annotations during training.
Method
# Train
Charades-STA
ActivityNet-Captions
Samples
R@0.3
R@0.5
R@0.7
mIoU
R@0.3
R@0.5
R@0.7
mIoU
Specialist models
UniVTG [23]
4.2M
44.1
25.2
10.0
27.1
–
–
–
–
SeViLA [48]
129M
–
–
–
–
31.6
19.0
10.1
23.0
LT-ZVG † [18]
–
52.9
37.2
19.3
36.0
47.6
32.6
15.4
31.8
MLLM-based models
VideoChat2 [22]
2M
38.0
14.3
3.8
24.6
40.8
27.8
9.3
27.9
Momenter [32]
10M
42.6
26.6
11.6
28.5
42.9
23.0
12.4
29.3
TimeLLM [14]
170K
51.0
27.5
11.4
31.2
44.0
27.8
14.3
30.4
TimeChat [35]
125K
–
32.2
13.4
–
–
–
–
–
HawkEye [44]
715K
50.6
31.4
14.5
33.7
49.1
29.3
10.7
32.7
ChatVTG [33]
100K
52.7
33.0
15.9
34.9
40.7
22.5
9.4
27.2
VIRTUE-Embed 7B (Ours)
–
55.5
36.8
16.6
35.9
47.2
26.7
14.5
33.4
Table 6: Ablation Studies on MSR-VTT 1K-A test set for Text-to-Video Retrieval
Configuration
R@1
R@5
Contrastive training stages
Image only (CC595k)
44.0
69.4
Video only (PEVideo)
41.6
64.7
VIRTUE-Embed
46.8
70.8
Socratic baseline
Caption-based Retrieval
32.6
54.9
Re-ranking Loss Components
Random negatives only
55.3
76.6
Hard negatives only
52.2
73.6
Preference loss only
53.1
75.5
4.2 Composed Video Retrieval
We evaluate our corpus-level embedding model on the CoVR benchmark [41] for composed video retrieval in a zero-shot setting. CoVR consists of triplets in the form (source video, modification text, target video), where the task is to retrieve the target video representing the transformation the source video would undergo under the textual modification. This task is challenging as it requires jointly interpreting the visual content of the source video and the semantic transformation described in the modification text.
As shown in Tab. 4, our approach achieves state-of-the-art performance, outperforming Thawakar et. al [39] by \sim 8% on R@1, highlighting the effectiveness of our zero-shot composed retrieval formulation.
4.3 Zero-shot Moment Retrieval
We evaluate our embedding model on moment retrieval using Charades-STA [11] and ActivityNet-Captions [19]. Our approach, detailed in Sec. 3.3, operates by computing dense frame-level similarities and localizing high-confidence temporal regions through peak detection. Following standard convention, we report Recall@ k at IoU thresholds and mIoU metrics on the test and val-2 splits respectively.
Tab. 5 compares our approach against competitive methods including generalist MLLM-based models and task-specific specialists (architectures tailored to the task) in a zero-shot setting. Our VIRTUE-Embed achieves competitive performance across both benchmarks in a purely zero-shot manner. We obtain the best R@0.3 on Charades-STA and the best mIoU on ActivityNet-Captions, while achieving strong results across other metrics. Critically, this represents true zero-shot learning, in contrast to prior methods that, despite being evaluated zero-shot on target datasets, still leverage temporally-annotated samples from auxiliary moment localization datasets during training [44].
Our frame-level embedding approach offers several advantages: (1) it is computationally efficient compared to MLLM-based methods that generate frame captions or jointly process entire videos to predict timestamps, enabling better scalability to long-form videos; (2) it achieves strong performance without auxiliary post-processing steps such as query debiasing with external LLMs or candidate proposal generation from separate models, which are commonly used to boost performance in prior work; and (3) since our model naturally handles composed queries, it can be readily extended to composed moment retrieval tasks, which we leave for future exploration.
4.4 Ablations
We conduct a series of ablation studies on the MSR-VTT benchmark in a zero-shot setting to analyze the contribution of individual components in our framework. Results are summarized in Tab. 6.
Contrastive training stages. We ablate the design choice of our two-stage contrastive training process by evaluating models trained with only image-text data (CC595K) or only video-text data (PEVideo) without the additional re-ranking step. The results demonstrate that both stages contribute complementary benefits: image-only training achieves 44.0% R@1 while video-only training achieves 41.6% R@1, compared to 46.8% R@1 for our final VIRTUE-Embed model, yielding absolute improvements of 2.8 and 5.2 percentage points respectively.
Socratic baseline. To assess the effectiveness of our cross-modal contrastive training strategy, we implement a caption-based retrieval baseline that approximates the raw zero-shot performance of our base MLLM. We generate detailed video captions using Qwen2.5-VL, embed both captions and queries using GRIT-LM 7B [31], a SOTA text embedding model, and compute retrieval metrics. This baseline achieves 32.6% R@1, substantially lower than our embedding-only model (46.8%), highlighting the value of cross-modal contrastive learning over caption-mediated retrieval.
Re-ranking loss components. We ablate the individual loss components in our re-ranker training. Training with random negatives achieves 55.3% R@1, while hard negatives alone achieve 52.2%, and preference loss alone achieves 53.1%.
5 Conclusion
We introduced VIRTUE, a video retrieval-centric adaptation of an MLLM that unifies corpus-level retrieval, candidate re-ranking, composed multimodal querying and moment localization within a single architecture. Through contrastive alignment on video–text pairs, VIRTUE produces strong multimodal embeddings and further improves retrieval precision with a simple reranker. Despite relying on modest adaptation data consisting of vision-text pairs, VIRTUE matches or exceeds the performance of specialized video retrieval systems while enabling versatile retrieval modes such as composed and moment retrieval. Our results suggest that retrieval-oriented contrastive adaptation of MLLMs is a powerful and scalable design choice, and we anticipate that training on larger video–text corpora and richer video descriptions will further elevate the capability of unified retrieval systems. We hope VIRTUE serves as a foundation for future work developing flexible, general-purpose video retrieval engines that can handle increasingly complex and expressive user queries.
ENDSOURCE


SOURCE https://arxiv.org/html/2601.12303v1
Concepts from Representations: Post-hoc Concept Bottleneck Models via Sparse Decomposition of Visual Representations
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
License: CC BY 4.0
arXiv:2601.12303v1 [cs.CV] 18 Jan 2026
Concepts from Representations: Post-hoc Concept Bottleneck Models via
Sparse Decomposition of Visual Representations
Shizhan Gong
Xiaofan Zhang
Qi Dou
Abstract
Deep learning has achieved remarkable success in image recognition, yet their inherent opacity poses challenges for deployment in critical domains. Concept-based interpretations aim to address this by explaining model reasoning through human-understandable concepts. However, existing post-hoc methods and ante-hoc concept bottleneck models (CBMs), suffer from limitations such as unreliable concept relevance, non-visual or labor-intensive concept definitions, and model/data-agnostic assumptions. This paper introduces Post-hoc Concept Bottleneck Model via Representation Decomposition (PCBM-ReD), a novel pipeline that retrofits interpretability onto pretrained opaque models. PCBM-ReD automatically extracts visual concepts from a pre-trained encoder, employs multimodal large language models (MLLMs) to label and filter concepts based on visual identifiability and task relevance, and selects an independent subset via reconstruction-guided optimization. Leveraging CLIP’s visual-text alignment, it decomposes image representations into linear combination of concept embeddings to fit into the CBMs abstraction. Extensive experiments across 11 image classification tasks show PCBM-ReD achieves state-of-the-art accuracy, narrows the performance gap with end-to-end models, and exhibits better interpretability.
1The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
2Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China
szgong22@cse.cuhk.edu.hk, xiaofan.zhang@sjtu.edu.cn, qidou@cuhk.edu.hk
Code — https://github.com/peterant330/PCBM˙ReD
1 Introduction
Deep learning has made significant strides in various image recognition tasks. However, the complexity of these models, which is often necessary to achieve high accuracy, leads to an opaque behavior. This limits the broader application in critical fields such as medical imaging analysis (Gong et al. 2025b) and autonomous driving (Omeiza et al. 2021). Concept-based interpretation is a subfield of explainable artificial intelligence that aims to use human understandable concepts to explain the model behaviors. Concept-based methods usually represent the semantic features learned by the network with concept labels, so that human can understand which features are responsible for the final predictions.
Figure 1: PCBM-ReD extracts concepts from the pre-trained image encoder and reconstruct the visual representation with the concepts, which gives faithful interpretation and can take the best advantage of the encoder’s representation power.
Concept-based methods can be divided into post-hoc methods and ante-hoc approaches (Fig. 1). Post-hoc methods associate latent space
representations to human-understandable concepts, either supervised with user-defined concepts (Bau et al. 2017; Fong and Vedaldi 2018) or by unsupervised pattern recognition (Ge et al. 2021; Vielhaben, Bluecher, and Strodthoff 2023). However, these methods face some major limitations. Firstly, there is no guarantee that the extracted concepts faithfully reflect the reasoning process of the network. Additionally, there may be no intuitive and human-understandable causal relationship between the extracted concepts and targets, making it difficult for users to understand the mechanism of the network. Moreover, automated concepts mining process can generate a great number of concepts with low semantic value, which are difficult to be labeled by humans (Kim et al. 2018).
Concept Bottleneck Models (CBMs) (Koh et al. 2020) are ante-hoc approaches that integrate concept associations into neural networks through modifications in model design or training. They predict a set of interpretable concepts and use a linear function to generate final predictions based on these concepts. This structure allows users to trace the links between concepts and class labels, facilitating error correction. CBMs rely on user-defined concepts, which can be either manually crafted by experts (Koh et al. 2020; Yun et al. 2022) or generated by large language models (LLMs) (Yang et al. 2023; Oikarinen et al. 2023). However, the current CBMs exhibit several weaknesses: human-crafted concepts can be labor-intensive and may lack comprehensive coverage (Koh et al. 2020), while LLMs-generated concepts often include non-visual features (e.g., the taste of food or bird behavior, which are not visually inferred) (Yang et al. 2023). Additionally, these pre-defined concepts are data-independent and model-agnostic, which can hinder their effectiveness, especially if a dataset is biased towards certain subpopulation or if the image encoder cannot capture certain features (e.g., color or spatial relationships (Kamath, Hessel, and Chang 2023)). Furthermore, current methods do not guarantee the independence of generated concepts, which is essential for effective interventions in CBMs. These limitations hinder CBMs from achieving complete feature space interpretability (Kim et al. 2018).
In this work, we introduce a novel pipeline that retrofits interpretability onto pretrained opaque foundation models, called Post-hoc Concept Bottleneck Model via Representation Decomposition (PCBM-ReD). Given a pre-trained image encoder, we first apply automatic concept extraction (Fel et al. 2023) to mine the generalizable features encoded within the foundation models. To further ensure they are visually-identifiable, human-understandable, and task-related, we use multimodal large language models (MLLMs) to label concepts by summarizing descriptions of top-activated images for each concept and scoring them based on prior knowledge of the task. We then propose a reconstruction-guided concept selection algorithm that selects a subset of concepts, whose embedding spans are independent and completely define the visual representation space. For image-concept association, we utilize the visual-text alignment property of CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), which allows us to decompose the visual representation into a weighted sum of the concepts’ text embeddings. By eliminating residual terms and fitting a linear function to the reconstructed representation, we can develop a model that adheres to the abstractions of CBMs while preserving the representational power of the original opaque visual encoder.
We conduct comprehensive experiments to demonstrate the efficacy of our proposed method. We evaluate the model performance on 11 image classification tasks, including common object recognition, fine-grained types, texture, and action classification, as well as domain-specific tasks such as medical diagnosis and satellite image object recognition. Our main finding is that the model achieves state-of-the-art classification accuracy, with a reduced gap compared to end-to-end models, compared to existing CBMs. Furthermore, as we aim to mimic the behavior of the end-to-end model using CBM, our approach exhibits similar properties, including zero-shot and few-shot capabilities. Additionally, we conduct human evaluation to demonstrate the improved interpretability of PCBM-ReD. Our main contributions include:
•
We propose a data-driven scheme for creating and selecting concepts that align with the data distribution and the image encoder’s representation capabilities.
•
We propose constructing CBMs by leveraging CLIP’s visual-text alignment to sparsely decompose the visual representation into concept embeddings.
•
We demonstrate that PCBM-ReD achieves SOTA classification accuracy across various tasks, along with better interpretability and robust zero/few-shot capabilities.
2 Related Work
Explanations in Computer Vision.
Explainable computer vision primarily falls into two categories: post-hoc explanations and interpretable models by design. Post-hoc explanation methods generate saliency maps to identify which input features influence the decisions of neural networks (Simonyan, Vedaldi, and Zisserman 2013; Selvaraju et al. 2017; Gong, Dou, and Farnia 2024; Gong et al. 2025a). However, these methods do not guarantee that the explanations faithfully reflect the model’s reasoning process (Rudin 2019). In contrast, interpretable models by design ensure that explanations align with the models’ reasoning (Chen et al. 2019; Nauta, Van Bree, and Seifert 2021; Ma et al. 2024; Tan, Zhou, and Chen 2024b). Our work builds upon CBMs (Koh et al. 2020), a type of interpretable models.
Concept Bottleneck Models.
CBMs (Koh et al. 2020; Zarlenga et al. 2022; Kim et al. 2023; Gong et al. 2025b) predict outcomes by linearly combining an intermediate layer of human-understandable attributes. The original CBM relies on handcrafted and manually annotated attributes. CompDL (Yun et al. 2022) replaces manual annotations with CLIP scores, but still depends on concepts designed by human. LaBo (Yang et al. 2023) and label-free CBM (Oikarinen et al. 2023) further automate concept generation using LLMs. Early CBMs often underperformed compared to end-to-end models. To improve it, Post-hoc CBM (Yuksekgonul, Wang, and Zou 2022) introduces a residual connection from image features to predictions, while Res-CBM (Shang et al. 2024) approximates this connection by incrementally adding new concepts. OpenCBM (Tan, Zhou, and Chen 2024a) detects missing concepts from an open vocabulary. Our method reduces residuals from the beginning by mining concepts that can well reconstruct the image representations.
Figure 2: We present an overview of Post-hoc Concept Bottleneck Model via Representation Decomposition (PCBM-ReD). First, we extract concepts from the learned representation, and use MLLMs to summarize and score the concepts. Second, we apply a concept selection algorithm to choose concepts and construct the bottleneck. Third, we perform sparse decomposition and reconstruct the image embedding by concepts. A linear layer is trained to predict the targets with the fitted embedding.
CLIP Interpretation.
CLIP (Radford et al. 2021) utilizes contrastive learning on a large dataset of paired text and images to link images with their textual descriptions. This approach effectively groups similar concepts together and shows strong performance in downstream tasks, such as zero-shot classifications (Saha, Van Horn, and Maji 2024).
Several studies focusing on the interpretation of CLIP have shown that its homogeneous feature space allows the visual embeddings to be decomposed into multiple concepts represented by concepts’ text embeddings (Moayeri et al. 2023; Chen et al. 2023; Gandelsman, Efros, and Steinhardt 2023; Gandelsman, Efros, and Steinhardt 2024). This provides the theoretical foundation for our method, which constructs CBMs by directly decomposing visual representations into concepts representation, thus better preserving predictive power.
3 Method
Method
Interpret.
ImageNet
CIFAR10
CIFAR100
FOOD
Aircraft
Flower
CUB
UCF
DTD
HAM
RESISC
Average
Fully-supervised Setting
Linear Probe
✗
83.90
98.10
87.48
93.17
64.03
99.45
84.54
90.67
81.68
83.18
94.98
87.38
LaBo
✓
83.97
97.75
86.04
92.45
61.42
99.35
81.90
90.11
77.30
81.39
91.22
85.72
Res-CBM
✓
82.98
97.77
83.01
90.17
54.67
97.85
79.27
88.37
75.77
75.72
91.67
83.39
V2C-CBM
✓
84.15
98.03
86.41
92.84
60.71
98.94
83.12
-
78.49
81.12
92.86
-
PCBM-ReD (ours)
✓
84.48
98.05
87.27
93.16
62.95
99.39
84.80
90.38
81.44
81.39
93.31
86.97
Zero-shot Classification Setting
CLIP
✗
72.90
95.57
78.28
90.91
31.77
79.46
62.19
75.31
57.09
58.21
64.87
69.69
PCBM-ReD (ours)
✓
72.89
95.56
78.24
90.91
32.01
79.58
62.03
75.36
57.09
58.51
64.87
69.73
CuPL
✗
73.45
95.82
78.59
91.23
35.43
80.80
64.43
76.00
62.65
57.91
71.88
71.65
PCBM-ReD + CuPL (ours)
✓
73.43
95.80
78.59
91.22
35.52
80.67
64.62
75.91
62.77
58.11
71.88
71.68
Table 1: Test accuracy (%) of PCBM-ReD on 11 image classification benchmarks. We report performance of both fully-supervised setting and zero-shot setting. For fully-supervised setting, we compare PCBM-ReD with linear probe, LaBo and Res-CBM. For zero-shot setting, we utilize two strategies, i.e., vanilla CLIP and CuPL. CLIP ViT-L/14 is used as the backbone.
Consider a training set of image-label pairs \mathcal{D}=\{(\mathbf{x},y)\in\mathbb{R}^{d_{x}}\times\mathcal{Y}\} , and a bottleneck C made of N_{C} concepts, C:=\{c_{1},c_{2},\cdots,c_{N_{C}}\} . CBM make prediction by composing two functions, \hat{y}=f(g(\mathbf{x})) , where g:\mathbb{R}^{d_{x}}\rightarrow\mathbb{R}^{N_{C}} maps \mathbf{x} to a score for each element of the bottleneck, and f:\mathbb{R}^{N_{C}}\rightarrow\mathcal{Y} makes the final prediction on the label space given the concept scores. Fig. 2 presents an overview.
3.1 Data-driven Concept Discovery
Most existing methods for constructing bottlenecks rely on either handcrafted concepts (Koh et al. 2020) or concepts generated by LLMs (Yang et al. 2023). However, these concept creation processes are typically independent of the training data or the image encoder, which can result in suboptimal concepts that fail to capture variations in specific data distributions or are challenging for the visual encoder to distinguish. To overcome these limitations, we propose an approach that automatically extracts concepts from a pre-trained image encoder. We leverage the pre-trained multi-modal alignment model, CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), which consists of an image encoder \mathcal{I} and a text encoder \mathcal{T} . The image encoder transforms an image \mathbf{x}_{i} into a representation \mathbf{I}_{i}=\mathcal{I}(\mathbf{x}_{i})\in\mathbb{R}^{d} . If the encoder effectively captures structured patterns, its latent space should be disentangled into subspaces representing distinct concepts (Bau et al. 2017; Oikarinen and Weng 2022). To do so, we apply sparse autoencoder (SAE) (Bricken et al. 2023), which enables us to represent the visual embedding \mathbf{I}_{i} with the concept bank atoms \mathbf{u}_{i}\in\mathbb{R}^{k} , such that \mathbf{I}_{i}\approx\mathbf{V}\mathbf{u}_{i} . The SAE represents \mathbf{u}_{i} by a neural network \psi (i.e., \mathbf{u}_{i}=\psi(\mathbf{I}_{i}) ) and enforces sparsity on \mathbf{u}_{i} (Fel et al. 2023), known to effectively address the challenge of polysemanticity (Bricken et al. 2023). Other dictionary learning paradigms are also applicable.
Ideally, each column of \mathbf{V} represents a concept and the corresponding value of \mathbf{u}_{i} reflects the significance of the concept in \mathbf{I}_{i} . To transform the concepts into human-understandable form, we propose a MLLM-based pipeline for labeling and scoring the concepts. We sample a reasonable number of images from the training data as probing images, and obtain their corresponding \mathbf{u}_{i} . Then for each concept, we select the top K images with largest concept scores. We then prompt the MLLMs with chain-of-thought to summarize the concept. As shown in Fig. 2, for each image, we prompt MLLMs to describe the visual features that can help identify the category of the image. After collecting image descriptions for the top K images, we ask LLMs to summarize these descriptions and generate candidate concepts that is useful for a specific classification problem. This process results in a large number of candidate concepts, which may or may not be good concepts for the classification tasks. We then ask LLMs to score these concepts. We prompt the LLMs to only assign high scores to concepts that are visually identifiable, discriminatory, and free of shortcuts (e.g., concepts describing the background). We filtered out candidates with low scores, leaving only high-quality concepts.
3.2 Reconstruction-guided Concept Selection
The LLM-based scoring ensures that the resulting concepts are both human-understandable and relevant to specific tasks. However, the use of a limited sample size for summarizing these concepts can result in noisy outputs with low coverage of the overall dataset. Moreover, the candidate pool may include overlapping or repetitive concepts. To address these issues, it is crucial to select a subset of important and independent concepts that can still comprehensively cover the entire representation space.
We take a set of N probing images sampled from the training data, with \mathbf{I}_{1},\cdots,\mathbf{I}_{N} denoting their image embeddings in the joint text-image space. Given a collection of concepts \mathcal{C} , we can reconstruct the image representations by linear combination of the text representations of the concepts within the concept set (denoted as \mathbf{R}(\mathcal{C})\in\mathbb{R}^{M_{\mathcal{C}}\times d} ). We further define the reconstruction error to be the Frobenius norm of the difference between the original and the reconstructed image embedding. Our goal is to identify the optimal subset that minimize the reconstruction error:
\min_{\mathcal{C}}\sum_{i=1}^{N}\min_{\mathbf{\beta}_{i}(\mathcal{C})}\|\mathbf{I}_{i}-\mathbf{R}(\mathcal{C})^{T}\mathbf{\beta}_{i}(\mathcal{C})\|_{F}^{2},
(1)
where \mathbf{\beta}_{i}(\mathcal{C}) is the coefficients of linear combination for reconstructing \mathbf{I}_{i} .
While the subset selection is a discrete optimization problem without close-form solution, we propose a greedy algorithm that select concepts step-wisely. Additionally, although the inner optimization of coefficients \mathbf{\beta}_{i} has analytical solution, we need to solve the optimization problem for each concept within the set \mathcal{C} , which can be computational-intensive when the size of \mathcal{C} is large. We propose an algorithm for efficient computation, as illustrated in Alg. 1. Detailed explanation of the algorithm can be found in Appendix. The algorithm can incrementally select new concepts, minimizing reconstruction error to the greatest extent, while ensuring that the newly added concepts are linearly independent from the existing ones. The algorithm stops when the selected concepts reach a pre-defined value, or when all new concepts are linearly dependent on the existing concepts. It is important to note that, unlike the selection algorithms presented in previous work (Chen et al. 2019; Yang et al. 2023), this selection scheme is entirely unsupervised, making it suitable for zero/few-shot applications.
Input: Image embedding for N images stacked as rows in a matrix \mathbf{X}\in\mathbb{R}^{N\times d} , a pool of M concepts \{c_{i}\}_{i=1}^{M} , their corresponding text representations \{\mathcal{T}(c_{i})\}_{i=1}^{M} , selected concepts size m , identity matrix \mathbf{E}
Output: A set of selected candidates \mathcal{C}
Initialization: \mathcal{C}\leftarrow\phi , \mathcal{C}_{0}\leftarrow\{c_{i}\}_{i=1}^{M}
c^{*}\leftarrow\arg\max_{c\in\mathcal{C}_{0}}\left\|\mathbf{X}\cdot\left(\mathbf{E}-\frac{\mathcal{T}(c)\mathcal{T}(c)^{T}}{\mathcal{T}(c)^{T}\mathcal{T}(c)}\right)\right\|_{F}^{2}
\mathcal{C}\leftarrow\mathcal{C}\cup\{c^{*}\} , \mathcal{C}_{0}\leftarrow\mathcal{C}_{0}\setminus\{c^{*}\}
for i in [2,...,m] do
\mathbf{P}\leftarrow\mathbf{R}(\mathcal{C})(\mathbf{R}(\mathcal{C})^{T}\mathbf{R}(\mathcal{C}))^{-1}\mathbf{R}(\mathcal{C})^{T}
for c in \mathcal{C}_{0} do
z\leftarrow\mathcal{T}(c)^{T}(\mathbf{E}-\mathbf{P})\mathcal{T}(c)
if z=0 then
\mathcal{C}_{0}\leftarrow\mathcal{C}_{0}-\{c\}
else
\mathbf{Q}\leftarrow\mathcal{T}(c)\mathcal{T}(c)^{T}/z
\mathbf{L}(c)\leftarrow\mathbf{P}\mathbf{Q}\mathbf{P}-\mathbf{Q}\mathbf{P}-\mathbf{P}\mathbf{Q}+\mathbf{P}+\mathbf{Q}
if \mathcal{C}_{0}=\phi then
break
c^{*}\leftarrow\arg\min_{c\in\mathcal{C}_{0}}\|\mathbf{X}\left(\mathbf{E}-\mathbf{L}(c)\right)\|_{F}^{2}
\mathcal{C}\leftarrow\mathcal{C}\cup\{c^{*}\} , \mathcal{C}_{0}\leftarrow\mathcal{C}_{0}\setminus\{c^{*}\}
Algorithm 1 Concepts Selection Algorithm
3.3 Post-hoc Class-concept Association
Concept Scores Assignment.
Multimodal learning enables the alignment of representations from different modalities into a joint space. Several studies (Gandelsman, Efros, and Steinhardt 2023; Gandelsman, Efros, and Steinhardt 2024) have demonstrated that the image embeddings of CLIP can be represented as a weighted sum of text representations. Therefore, rather than relying on manual annotations or text-image similarity scores to generate concept score supervision, we propose to directly decompose the image representation into concept-related directions within the joint representation space. To ensure high interpretability, we aim for this decomposition to be sparse, utilizing only a few key concepts to explain the image representation. Mathematically, we express this as:
\mathbf{I}_{i}=\hat{\mathbf{I}}_{i}+\epsilon_{i}=\sum_{j=1}^{m}w_{j}^{i}\mathbf{c}_{j}+\epsilon_{i},
(2)
where \mathbf{c}_{j} is the embedding of concept c_{j} and \epsilon_{i} is residue. We apply a sparse coding algorithm (e.g., orthogonal matching pursuit (Pati, Rezaiifar, and Krishnaprasad 1993)) to approximate \mathbf{I}_{i} as the sum above, where only n of the w^{i}_{j} are non-zero, for some n<m .
Label Predictor. After decompose each image embedding \mathbf{I}_{i} into the sum of concept embedding, we discard the residue and retain only the fitted representation \hat{\mathbf{I}}_{i} . We then fit a linear layer to predict the class label from the fitted representation, expressed as \hat{y}_{i}=\argmax{(\mathbf{W}^{T}\hat{\mathbf{I}}_{i}+\mathbf{b}}) . This function can be reformulated as \hat{y}_{i}=\argmax{(\sum_{j=1}^{m}w^{i}_{j}\mathbf{W}^{T}\mathbf{c}_{j}}+\mathbf{b}) . As a result, it satisfies the CBM abstraction, with the coefficients [w_{1}^{i},\cdots,w_{m}^{i}] representing the concept scores, and \mathbf{W}^{T}[\mathbf{c}_{1},\cdots,\mathbf{c}_{m}] serving as the class-concept weight matrix. Unlike traditional CBMs that train a sparse class-concept weight matrix to improve the model interpretability, our method enforces sparsity on the concept score side by applying sparse decomposition to the visual representation.
Weight Matrix Initialization. Since \hat{\mathbf{I}}_{i} is an approximation of \mathbf{I}_{i} , it shares similar properties with \mathbf{I}_{i} . One advantage of \mathbf{I}_{i} is its zero-shot capability, stemming from the alignment of image and text representations. Ideally, \hat{\mathbf{I}}_{i} would exhibit similar zero-shot ability. To better leverage this zero-shot prior, we propose to initialize \mathbf{W} with the text embeddings of the prompt “This is a photo of [cls]”.
Method
Interpret.
CIFAR10
CIFAR100
CUB
Average
Linear Probe
✗
88.80
70.10
72.14
77.01
Original CBM
✓
-
-
65.13
-
CompDL
✓
-
-
54.19
-
PCBM
✓
84.50
56.00
63.63
68.04
Label-free CBM
✓
86.40
65.13
62.40
71.31
CDM
✓
86.50
67.60
72.26
75.45
DN-CBM
✓
87.60
67.50
68.38
74.49
VLG-CBM
✓
88.63
66.48
66.03
73.71
PCBM-ReD (ours)
✓
88.61
70.03
72.01
76.88
Table 2: Test accuracy (%) comparison between PCBM-ReD and baselines for fully-supervised setting. We use CLIP RN50 as the backbone for all methods.
Figure 3: Few-shot test accuracy (%) comparison. Average test accuracy on 11 datasets is reported. Shot means the number of labeled images for each class.
Figure 4: Several example explanations generated by PCBM-ReD. The examples are sampled from the test set of 11 datasets, which have correct predictions. We also show their corresponding top concepts that contribute the most to the logits.
Figure 5: Human evaluation. Volunteers rate the explanation on a scale of 1 to 5 (5 = very agree). S1: The explanations are visually identifiable features. S2: The explanations faithfully describe the image. S3: There is a causal relationship between the explanation and the prediction.
4 Experiments
4.1 Dataset and Baselines
Following the benchmark proposed by (Yang et al. 2023), we use 11 image classification datasets spanning a diverse set of domains, including (1) Common objects: ImageNet (Deng et al. 2009), CIFAR-10 and CIFAR-100 (Krizhevsky, Hinton et al. 2009); (2) Fine-grained objects: Food-101 (Bossard, Guillaumin, and Van Gool 2014), FGVC-Aircraft (Maji et al. 2013), Flower-102 (Nilsback and Zisserman 2008), CUB-200-2011 (Wah et al. 2011); (3) Actions: UCF-101 (Soomro 2012); (4) Textures: DTD (Cimpoi et al. 2014); (5) Skin tumors: HAM10000 (Tschandl, Rosendahl, and Kittler 2018), and (6) Satellite images: RESISC45 (Cheng, Han, and Lu 2017). We use the same train/dev/test splits as (Yang et al. 2023) for all datasets. For all experiments, we train on the training set and report the test accuracy. We compare our model, PCBM-ReD, with end-to-end linear probing, as implemented from CLIP (Radford et al. 2021), as well as several CBMs, including
original CBM (Koh et al. 2020), PCBM (Yuksekgonul, Wang, and Zou 2022), CompDL (Yun et al. 2022), label-free CBM (Oikarinen et al. 2023), LaBo (Yang et al. 2023), Res-CBM (Shang et al. 2024), CDM (Panousis, Ienco, and Marcos 2023), DN-CBM (Rao et al. 2024), V2C-CBM (He et al. 2025), and VLG-CBM (Srivastava, Yan, and Weng 2024).
4.2 Implementation Details
We use Llama-3.2-11B-Vision-Instruct to generate image descriptions and use DeepSeek-V3 to summarize and score the concepts. We use CLIP models from OpenCLIP (Cherti et al. 2023) with ViT-L/14 as the default backbone. To train the linear head, we use Adam optimizer with the batch size of 64 and the learning rate of 5\times 10^{-5} . All experiments were conducted on NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPUs. More details are provided in the Appendix.
Figure 6: Ablation studies. (a) Test accuracy with different creation schemes of the concepts and the size of the bottleneck. (b) Comparison between reconstruction-guided concept selection, random sampling, and K-Means. (c) Comparison between decomposition-based and CLIP similarity-based concept score association. (d) Effects of sources of the extracted concepts.
4.3 Main Results
Comparison with End-to-end Model.
Table 1 presents the test accuracy of both PCBM-ReD and the linear probe. Our findings indicate that the performance difference between PCBM-ReD and the linear probe is minimal, with an average test accuracy that is just 0.41% lower, despite improved interpretability. Notably, for several datasets, PCBM-ReD even outperforms the end-to-end model. In general, the performance of PCBM-ReD is affected by the concepts, which in turn depend on the quality of the description. For datasets like HAM, general MLLMs may struggle to accurately describe the skin tumors using specific terminology. Domain-specific MLLMs may further improve the performance.
Comparison with other CBMs. We also compare PCBM-ReD’s performance with other CBMs in Table 1 and 2. PCBM-ReD outperforms other language-guided CBMs such as LaBo and label-free CBM. It shows an average test accuracy that is 1.25% higher than LaBo and 5.57% higher than label-free CBM. It also achieves greater accuracy than CompDL and the original CBM, even though it does not depend on manually constructed concepts and annotations.
4.4 Performance on Low-data Regime
Zero-shot Ability.
Since the weighted sum of concept embeddings approximates the original image embeddings, it retains zero-shot capabilities similar to the original embeddings, something existing CBMs typically lack. In Table 1, we present zero-shot accuracy using two strategies: the vanilla approach from CLIP and CuPL (Pratt et al. 2023). For comparison, we include the performance of the original CLIP representation. The results show that our method achieves strong zero-shot performance, with average accuracy comparable to CLIP, while being interpretable.
Few-shot Performance.
We also evaluate the few-shot performance of PCBM-ReD across various datasets. We follow the few-shot evaluation protocol proposed by
CLIP with 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 images randomly sampled
from the training set for each class. In Fig. 3, we present the average test accuracy, alongside the accuracy of LaBo for comparison. The full results can be found in Appendix. The results show PCBM-ReD consistently outperform LaBo. On average, PCBM-ReD surpasses LaBo by 5.01%. This shows the potential application of our methods in few-shot learning.
4.5 Interpretation Evaluation
Qualitative Analysis.
To evaluate PCBM-ReD’s interpretability, we present examples illustrating its reasoning process. In Fig. 4, we visualize test set images alongside the top three concepts that most significantly contribute to the correct class’s logit. The results show that PCBM-ReD effectively identifies key concepts in the images, which reliably predict corresponding labels. Furthermore, the concepts adapt to different data distributions. For general tasks like ImageNet classification, broad concepts (e.g., color, class) suffice to differentiate categories. In contrast, fine-grained classification requires more specific details (e.g., object parts). Additionally, the concepts are derived directly from visual features, which further enhances the interpretability.
Human Evaluation. We conduct a user study to evaluate the quality of the extracted concepts and generated explanations. Images from five datasets (Imagenet, Food-101, UCF-101, CUB-200-2011, and Flower-102) are randomly selected, and users are shown the image, prediction, and top concepts as explanations. Users rate the explanations on a scale of 1 to 5 based on: 1) whether the concepts are visually identifiable, 2) whether the concepts faithfully describe the image, and 3) whether the explanations have a clear causal link to class labels. Details of the study design are in the Appendix. For comparison, we evaluate explanations using concepts generated by prompting LLMs to describe the class based solely on prior knowledge without training image access (Yang et al. 2023), and PCBM-ReD without LLM-based concept rating. Results from 39 volunteers (Fig. 5) show that PCBM-ReD, which extracts concepts from image descriptions, produces mostly visually identifiable concepts. The concept rating step removes non-causal concepts, enabling the full PCBM-ReD to outperform all baselines.
4.6 Analytical Studies
We perform several ablation studies and report the average accuracy across CIFAR10, CIFAR100, and CUB.
Bottleneck Size.
We investigate how the model’s performance changes with bottleneck size. As shown in Fig. 6 (a), test accuracy improves with more concepts in the bottleneck, nearly saturating at 300. Notably, even a small bottleneck of 50 achieves reasonable accuracy. Additionally, the required bottleneck size is independent of the number of label classes. Fewer concepts also enhance interpretability.
Concept Creation Schemes.
We compare our concept creation scheme with: (1) LLM-generated concepts (Yang et al. 2023) and (2) ”Core” WordNet concepts (Boyd-Graber et al. 2006), using the same preprocessing and selection algorithms as PCBM-ReD. Results in Fig. 6 (a) show that our data-driven scheme outperforms both alternatives. Additionally, it avoids non-visual concepts, as confirmed by human evaluation, while also providing a performance boost.
Concept Selection Methods.
We evaluate the effectiveness of the reconstruction-guided concept selection algorithm by comparing it with two baselines: random sampling and k-means clustering. As shown in Fig. 6 (b), our method consistently outperforms both baselines, with a noticeable performance gap at smaller bottlenecks. By selecting concepts that minimize reconstruction error, the reconstruction-guided approach ensures higher final accuracy.
Concept Score Association.
We compare the sparsity decomposition-based concept score association and to baseline that uses CLIP similarity scores as concept scores. As shown in Fig. 6 (c), representation decomposition achieves significantly higher accuracy. By reconstructing visual representations with concepts, it ensures performance comparable to the original model, achieving higher accuracy.
Sources of the Concepts.
Finally, we examine the impact of concept sources by using concepts extracted from different image encoders to construct CBMs. Results in Fig. 6 (d) show a performance decline when the backbones are mismatched, highlighting the importance of aligning concepts with the representational capabilities of the image encoder.
5 Limitations and Conclusion
In this paper, we propose PCBM-ReD, a novel CBM that generates concepts through post-hoc decomposition of visual representations. It achieves high accuracy, zero-shot/few-shot capabilities, and built-in interpretability. However, the approach has some limitations. First, the concept generation relies on MLLMs and LLMs, which can be suboptimal for domain-specific images that general MLLMs cannot describe precisely. Second, as a post-hoc method, the model’s performance depends on the original image encoder. We will further improve the model by designing better prompts or leveraging more advanced MLLMs.
Acknowledgments
This research work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Project No. 62322318 and No. 62201485), in part by the Research Grants Council of Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. T45-401/22-N).
ENDSOURCE


