https://arxiv.org/api/g137+yXVTB910Hv6SFfW7VRfnes
arXiv Query: search_query=(cat:cs.CL OR cat:cs.LG OR cat:cs.DC OR cat:cs.AI OR cat:cs.AR OR cat:cs.PL OR cat:cs.OS OR cat:cs.PF OR cat:cs.IR OR cat:cs.MA OR cat:cs.CV OR cat:cs.RO) AND (ti:transformer OR ti:MoE OR ti:"language model") AND (all:training OR all:attention OR all:reasoning OR all:optimization) AND submittedDate:"202510241800 TO 202510271800"&id_list=&start=0&max_results=100
2026-10-04T20:57:28Z
100
56
0
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23641v2
Spatially Aware Linear Transformer (SAL-T) for Particle Jet Tagging
2026-05-16T00:01:14Z
Transformers are very effective in capturing both global and local correlations within high-energy particle collisions, but they present deployment challenges in high-data-throughput environments, such as the CERN LHC. The quadratic complexity of transformer models demands substantial resources and increases latency during inference. In order to address these issues, we introduce the Spatially Aware Linear Transformer (SAL-T), a physics-inspired enhancement of the linformer architecture that maintains linear attention. Our method incorporates spatially aware partitioning of particles based on kinematic features, thereby computing attention between regions of physical significance. Additionally, we employ convolutional layers to capture local correlations, informed by insights from jet physics. In addition to outperforming the standard linformer in jet classification tasks, SAL-T also achieves classification results comparable to full-attention transformers, while using considerably fewer resources with lower latency during inference. Experiments on a generic point cloud classification dataset (ModelNet10) further confirm this trend. Our code is available at https://github.com/aaronw5/SAL-T4HEP.
2025-10-24T18:00:01Z
Aaron Wang
Zihan Zhao
Subash Katel
Vivekanand Gyanchand Sahu
Elham E Khoda
Abhijith Gandrakota
Jennifer Ngadiuba
Richard Cavanaugh
Javier Duarte
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.21956v1
Transformer Based Linear Attention with Optimized GPU Kernel Implementation
2025-10-24T18:32:20Z
The original softmax-based attention mechanism (regular attention) in the extremely successful Transformer architecture computes attention between $N$ tokens, each embedded in a $D$-dimensional head, with a time complexity of $O(N^2D)$. Given the success of Transformers, improving their runtime during both training and inference is a popular research area. One such approach is the introduction of the linear attention (LA) mechanisms, which offers a linear time complexity of $O(ND^2)$ and have demonstrated comparable accuracy to regular attention. However, LA in practice lags behind its theoretical efficiency. We propose a novel method for LA's forward and backward passes, along with a highly-optimized CUDA implementation. Our approach outperforms the state-of-the-art by 3.3 times in speed and reduces memory consumption by 3.6 times. We validate these improvements in both single-layer and end-to-end settings by training a 1.4 billion parameter language model, which demonstrates similar expressivity to regular attention on major reasoning benchmarks.
2025-10-24T18:32:20Z
Armin Gerami
Ramani Duraiswami
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.21958v1
A Stylometric Application of Large Language Models
2025-10-24T18:35:17Z
We show that large language models (LLMs) can be used to distinguish the writings of different authors. Specifically, an individual GPT-2 model, trained from scratch on the works of one author, will predict held-out text from that author more accurately than held-out text from other authors. We suggest that, in this way, a model trained on one author's works embodies the unique writing style of that author. We first demonstrate our approach on books written by eight different (known) authors. We also use this approach to confirm R. P. Thompson's authorship of the well-studied 15th book of the Oz series, originally attributed to F. L. Baum.
2025-10-24T18:35:17Z
All code and data needed to reproduce the results in this paper are available at https://github.com/ContextLab/llm-stylometry
Harrison F. Stropkay
Jiayi Chen
Mohammad J. Latifi
Daniel N. Rockmore
Jeremy R. Manning
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.21970v1
Performance Trade-offs of Optimizing Small Language Models for E-Commerce
2025-10-24T18:49:28Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) offer state-of-the-art performance in natural language understanding and generation tasks. However, the deployment of leading commercial models for specialized tasks, such as e-commerce, is often hindered by high computational costs, latency, and operational expenses. This paper investigates the viability of smaller, open-weight models as a resource-efficient alternative. We present a methodology for optimizing a one-billion-parameter Llama 3.2 model for multilingual e-commerce intent recognition. The model was fine-tuned using Quantized Low-Rank Adaptation (QLoRA) on a synthetically generated dataset designed to mimic real-world user queries. Subsequently, we applied post-training quantization techniques, creating GPU-optimized (GPTQ) and CPU-optimized (GGUF) versions. Our results demonstrate that the specialized 1B model achieves 99% accuracy, matching the performance of the significantly larger GPT-4.1 model. A detailed performance analysis revealed critical, hardware-dependent trade-offs: while 4-bit GPTQ reduced VRAM usage by 41%, it paradoxically slowed inference by 82% on an older GPU architecture (NVIDIA T4) due to dequantization overhead. Conversely, GGUF formats on a CPU achieved a speedup of up to 18x in inference throughput and a reduction of over 90% in RAM consumption compared to the FP16 baseline. We conclude that small, properly optimized open-weight models are not just a viable but a more suitable alternative for domain-specific applications, offering state-of-the-art accuracy at a fraction of the computational cost.
2025-10-24T18:49:28Z
15 pages, 9 figures
Josip Tomo Licardo
Nikola Tankovic
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.21986v2
Sprint: Sparse-Dense Residual Fusion for Efficient Diffusion Transformers
2026-01-09T01:58:14Z
Diffusion Transformers (DiTs) deliver state-of-the-art generative performance but their quadratic training cost with sequence length makes large-scale pretraining prohibitively expensive. Token dropping can reduce training cost, yet naïve strategies degrade representations, and existing methods are either parameter-heavy or fail at high drop ratios. We present SPRINT, Sparse--Dense Residual Fusion for Efficient Diffusion Transformers, a simple method that enables aggressive token dropping (up to 75%) while preserving quality. SPRINT leverages the complementary roles of shallow and deep layers: early layers process all tokens to capture local detail, deeper layers operate on a sparse subset to cut computation, and their outputs are fused through residual connections. Training follows a two-stage schedule: long masked pre-training for efficiency followed by short full-token fine-tuning to close the train--inference gap. On ImageNet-1K 256x256, SPRINT achieves 9.8x training savings with comparable FID/FDD, and at inference, its Path-Drop Guidance (PDG) nearly halves FLOPs while improving quality. These results establish SPRINT as a simple, effective, and general solution for efficient DiT training.
2025-10-24T19:29:55Z
Dogyun Park
Moayed Haji-Ali
Yanyu Li
Willi Menapace
Sergey Tulyakov
Hyunwoo J. Kim
Aliaksandr Siarohin
Anil Kag
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22014v2
Toward Understanding the Transferability of Adversarial Suffixes in Large Language Models
2026-08-04T16:53:44Z
Discrete optimization-based jailbreaking attacks on large language models aim to generate short, nonsensical suffixes that, when appended onto input prompts, elicit disallowed content. Notably, these suffixes are often transferable -- succeeding on prompts and models for which they were never optimized. And yet, despite the fact that transferability is surprising and empirically well-established, the field lacks a rigorous analysis of when and why transfer occurs. To fill this gap, we identify three statistical properties that strongly correlate with transfer success across numerous experimental settings: (1) how much a prompt without a suffix activates a model's internal refusal direction, (2) how strongly a suffix induces a push away from this direction, and (3) how large these shifts are in directions orthogonal to refusal. On the other hand, we find that prompt semantic similarity only weakly correlates with transfer success. These findings lead to a more fine-grained understanding of transferability, which we use in interventional experiments to showcase how our statistical analysis can translate into practical improvements in attack success.
2025-10-24T20:28:49Z
Accepted at TMLR 2026
Sarah Ball
Niki Hasrati
Alexander Robey
Avi Schwarzschild
Frauke Kreuter
Zico Kolter
Andrej Risteski
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22084v1
Compositional Bias Control in Large Language Models: Preference Learning Fails, Supervision Succeeds
2025-10-24T23:52:37Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) still produce gender-stereotyped language even in occupation-neutral contexts that reflect deep societal biases (Rudinger et al., 2018). To address this, prior work has proposed prompting, constrained decoding (Dathathri et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2024), post-processing, and fine-tuning-based alignment (Rafailov et al., 2023; Ravfogel et al., 2022). However, the comparative efficacy and learning dynamics remain little understood. We report a comparative analysis of six control techniques for bias mitigation: prompt-only, generate-and-filter, DFA-based Ctrl-G decoding, Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), Direct Preference Optimization (DPO), and Iterative Nullspace Projection (INLP). We evaluate each method on a compositional constraint task. This task requires generating sentences that contain at least one agentic and one communal descriptor for each of the twenty Winogender-derived occupations. We quantify trade-offs between control strength and naturalness with evaluations of constraint compliance, lexical diversity, and fluency. Our results reveal key contrasts among the methods: SFT achieves 99.87 +- 0.15% compliance and high lexical diversity, while DPO, despite similar training stability, fails at 4.53 +- 0.82%. Ctrl-G guarantees perfect compliance, but at the cost of severely reduced fluency and diversity. Preference-based learning fundamentally differs: it cannot satisfy compositional constraints, as binary preference signals encode ranking, not logical conjunctions. Only explicit positive supervision enables mitigation of compositional biases; preference-based alignment fails to generalize logical structures, underscoring the limitations of preference learning and the necessity of explicit supervision for fair and fluent controlled generation.
2025-10-24T23:52:37Z
20 pages
Atij Mahesh
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22085v1
Jailbreak Mimicry: Automated Discovery of Narrative-Based Jailbreaks for Large Language Models
2025-10-24T23:53:16Z
Large language models (LLMs) remain vulnerable to sophisticated prompt engineering attacks that exploit contextual framing to bypass safety mechanisms, posing significant risks in cybersecurity applications. We introduce Jailbreak Mimicry, a systematic methodology for training compact attacker models to automatically generate narrative-based jailbreak prompts in a one-shot manner. Our approach transforms adversarial prompt discovery from manual craftsmanship into a reproducible scientific process, enabling proactive vulnerability assessment in AI-driven security systems. Developed for the OpenAI GPT-OSS-20B Red-Teaming Challenge, we use parameter-efficient fine-tuning (LoRA) on Mistral-7B with a curated dataset derived from AdvBench, achieving an 81.0% Attack Success Rate (ASR) against GPT-OSS-20B on a held-out test set of 200 items. Cross-model evaluation reveals significant variation in vulnerability patterns: our attacks achieve 66.5% ASR against GPT-4, 79.5% on Llama-3 and 33.0% against Gemini 2.5 Flash, demonstrating both broad applicability and model-specific defensive strengths in cybersecurity contexts. This represents a 54x improvement over direct prompting (1.5% ASR) and demonstrates systematic vulnerabilities in current safety alignment approaches. Our analysis reveals that technical domains (Cybersecurity: 93% ASR) and deception-based attacks (Fraud: 87.8% ASR) are particularly vulnerable, highlighting threats to AI-integrated threat detection, malware analysis, and secure systems, while physical harm categories show greater resistance (55.6% ASR). We employ automated harmfulness evaluation using Claude Sonnet 4, cross-validated with human expert assessment, ensuring reliable and scalable evaluation for cybersecurity red-teaming. Finally, we analyze failure mechanisms and discuss defensive strategies to mitigate these vulnerabilities in AI for cybersecurity.
2025-10-24T23:53:16Z
18 pages, 5 figures
Pavlos Ntais
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22101v1
Scaling Up Efficient Small Language Models Serving and Deployment for Semantic Job Search
2025-10-25T00:56:06Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive quality when applied to predictive tasks such as relevance ranking and semantic search. However, deployment of such LLMs remains prohibitively expensive for industry applications with strict latency and throughput requirements. In this work, we present lessons and efficiency insights from developing a purely text-based decoder-only Small Language Model (SLM) for a semantic search application at LinkedIn. Particularly, we discuss model compression techniques such as pruning that allow us to reduce the model size by up to $40\%$ while maintaining the accuracy. Additionally, we present context compression techniques that allow us to reduce the input context length by up to $10$x with minimal loss of accuracy. Finally, we present practical lessons from optimizing the serving infrastructure for deploying such a system on GPUs at scale, serving millions of requests per second. Taken together, this allows us to increase our system's throughput by $10$x in a real-world deployment, while meeting our quality bar.
2025-10-25T00:56:06Z
Kayhan Behdin
Qingquan Song
Sriram Vasudevan
Jian Sheng
Xiaojing Ma
Z Zhou
Chuanrui Zhu
Guoyao Li
Chanh Nguyen
Sayan Ghosh
Hejian Sang
Ata Fatahi Baarzi
Sundara Raman Ramachandran
Xiaoqing Wang
Qing Lan
Vinay Y S
Qi Guo
Caleb Johnson
Zhipeng Wang
Fedor Borisyuk
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22171v2
HARMONY: Hidden Activation Representations and Model Output-Aware Uncertainty Estimation for Vision-Language Models
2025-11-28T19:46:39Z
Uncertainty Estimation (UE) plays a central role in quantifying the reliability of model outputs and reducing unsafe generations via selective prediction. In this regard, most existing probability-based UE approaches rely on predefined functions, aggregating token probabilities into a single UE score using heuristics such as length-normalization. However, these methods often fail to capture the complex relationships between generated tokens and struggle to identify biased probabilities often influenced by \textbf{language priors}. Another line of research uses hidden representations of the model and trains simple MLP architectures to predict uncertainty. However, such functions often lose the intricate \textbf{ inter-token dependencies}. While prior works show that hidden representations encode multimodal alignment signals, our work demonstrates that how these signals are processed has a significant impact on the UE performance. To effectively leverage these signals to identify inter-token dependencies, and vision-text alignment, we propose \textbf{HARMONY} (Hidden Activation Representations and Model Output-Aware Uncertainty Estimation for Vision-Language Models), a novel UE framework that integrates generated tokens ('text'), model's uncertainty score at the output ('MaxProb'), and its internal belief on the visual understanding of the image and the generated token (captured by 'hidden representations') at token level via appropriate input mapping design and suitable architecture choice. Our experimental experiments across two open-ended VQA benchmarks (A-OKVQA, and VizWiz) and four state-of-the-art VLMs (LLaVA-7B, LLaVA-13B, InstructBLIP, and Qwen-VL) show that HARMONY consistently matches or surpasses existing approaches, achieving up to 5\% improvement in AUROC and 9\% in PRR.
2025-10-25T05:45:18Z
Erum Mushtaq
Zalan Fabian
Yavuz Faruk Bakman
Anil Ramakrishna
Mahdi Soltanolkotabi
Salman Avestimehr
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22205v1
TrajGATFormer: A Graph-Based Transformer Approach for Worker and Obstacle Trajectory Prediction in Off-site Construction Environments
2025-10-25T08:08:10Z
As the demand grows within the construction industry for processes that are not only faster but also safer and more efficient, offsite construction has emerged as a solution, though it brings new safety risks due to the close interaction between workers, machinery, and moving obstacles. Predicting the future trajectories of workers and taking into account social and environmental factors is a crucial step for developing collision-avoidance systems to mitigate such risks. Traditional methods often struggle to adapt to the dynamic and unpredictable nature of construction environments. Many rely on simplified assumptions or require hand-crafted features, limiting their ability to respond to complex, real-time interactions between workers and moving obstacles. While recent data-driven methods have improved the modeling of temporal patterns, they still face challenges in capturing long-term behavior and accounting for the spatial and social context crucial to collision risk assessment. To address these limitations, this paper proposes a framework integrating YOLOv10n and DeepSORT for precise detection and tracking, along with two novel trajectory prediction models: TrajGATFormer and TrajGATFormer-Obstacle. YOLOv10n serves as the backbone for object detection, accurately identifying workers and obstacles in diverse scenes, while DeepSORT efficiently tracks them over time with unique IDs for continuity. Both models employ a transformer encoder-decoder with Graph Attention Networks (GAT) to capture temporal and spatial interactions. TrajGATFormer predicts worker trajectories with an ADE of 1.25 m and FDE of 2.3 m over a 4.8 s horizon, while TrajGATFormer-Obstacle extends prediction to both workers and obstacles, achieving higher accuracy (ADE 1.15 m, FDE 2.2 m). Comparative analysis shows both models outperform traditional methods, reducing ADE and FDE by up to 35% and 38%, respectively.
2025-10-25T08:08:10Z
Mohammed Alduais
Xinming Li
Qipei Mei
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23649v3
Efficient Low Rank Attention for Long-Context Inference in Large Language Models
2025-12-23T08:47:31Z
As the length of input text increases, the key-value (KV) cache in LLMs imposes prohibitive GPU memory costs and limits long-context inference on resource constrained devices. Existing approaches, such as KV quantization and pruning, reduce memory usage but suffer from numerical precision loss or suboptimal retention of key-value pairs. In this work, Low Rank Query and Key attention (LRQK) is introduced, a two-stage framework that jointly decomposes full-precision query and key matrices into compact rank-\(r\) factors during the prefill stage, and then employs these low-dimensional projections to compute proxy attention scores in \(\mathcal{O}(lr)\) time at each decode step. By selecting only the top-\(k\) tokens and a small fixed set of recent tokens, LRQK employs a mixed GPU-CPU cache with a hit-and-miss mechanism where only missing full-precision KV pairs are transferred, thereby preserving exact attention outputs while reducing CPU-GPU data movement. Extensive experiments on the RULER and LongBench benchmarks with LLaMA-3-8B and Qwen2.5-7B demonstrate that LRQK matches or surpasses leading sparse-attention methods in long context settings, while delivering significant memory savings with minimal accuracy loss. Our code is available at https://github.com/tenghuilee/LRQK.
2025-10-25T11:43:27Z
https://neurips.cc/virtual/2025/loc/san-diego/poster/118451
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025)
Tenghui Li
Guoxu Zhou
Xuyang Zhao
Yuning Qiu
Qibin Zhao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22272v2
From Slides to Chatbots: Enhancing Large Language Models with University Course Materials
2026-03-18T09:03:21Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) have advanced rapidly in recent years. One application of LLMs is to support student learning in educational settings. However, prior work has shown that LLMs still struggle to answer questions accurately within university-level computer science courses. In this work, we investigate how incorporating university course materials can enhance LLM performance in this setting. A key challenge lies in leveraging diverse course materials such as lecture slides and transcripts, which differ substantially from typical textual corpora: slides also contain visual elements like images and formulas, while transcripts contain spoken, less structured language. We compare two strategies, Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) and Continual Pre-Training (CPT), to extend LLMs with course-specific knowledge. For lecture slides, we further explore a multi-modal RAG approach, where we present the retrieved content to the generator in image form. Our experiments reveal that, given the relatively small size of university course materials, RAG is more effective and efficient than CPT. Moreover, incorporating slides as images in the multi-modal setting significantly improves performance over text-only retrieval. These findings highlight practical strategies for developing AI assistants that better support learning and teaching, and we hope they inspire similar efforts in other educational contexts.
2025-10-25T12:31:26Z
Accepted to NSLP @ LREC 2026
Tu Anh Dinh
Philipp Nicolas Schumacher
Jan Niehues
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22282v2
CityRiSE: Reasoning Urban Socio-Economic Status in Large Vision-Language Models via Reinforcement Learning
2026-08-13T11:41:11Z
Urban socio-economic sensing plays a vital role in advancing global sustainable development goals. With the advent of Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs), new opportunities have emerged to address this challenge by framing it as a multi-modal perception and reasoning task. However, recent studies show that LVLMs still struggle to make accurate and interpretable socio-economic predictions from visual data. To overcome these limitations and fully exploit the potential of LVLMs, we propose CityRiSE, a novel framework for Reasoning urban Socio-Economic status in LVLMs via reinforcement learning (RL). With carefully curated multi-modal dataset and verifiable reward design, our approach guides the LVLM to focus on semantically meaningful visual cues, enabling structured and goal-oriented reasoning for generalist socio-economic status prediction. Experiments demonstrate that CityRiSE, equipped with emergent reasoning, significantly outperforms existing baselines, improving both prediction accuracy and generalization across diverse urban contexts, especially on unseen cities and unseen indicators. This work highlights the promise of combining RL and LVLMs for interpretable and generalist urban socio-economic sensing.
2025-10-25T12:56:46Z
Accepted by ACM MM 2026, https://github.com/tsinghua-fib-lab/CityRiSE
Tianhui Liu
Hetian Pang
Xin Zhang
Jie Feng
Pan Hui
Yong Li
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22312v1
LacMaterial: Large Language Models as Analogical Chemists for Materials Discovery
2025-10-25T14:25:26Z
Analogical reasoning, the transfer of relational structures across contexts (e.g., planet is to sun as electron is to nucleus), is fundamental to scientific discovery. Yet human insight is often constrained by domain expertise and surface-level biases, limiting access to deeper, structure-driven analogies both within and across disciplines. Large language models (LLMs), trained on vast cross-domain data, present a promising yet underexplored tool for analogical reasoning in science. Here, we demonstrate that LLMs can generate novel battery materials by (1) retrieving cross-domain analogs and analogy-guided exemplars to steer exploration beyond conventional dopant substitutions, and (2) constructing in-domain analogical templates from few labeled examples to guide targeted exploitation. These explicit analogical reasoning strategies yield candidates outside established compositional spaces and outperform standard prompting baselines. Our findings position LLMs as interpretable, expert-like hypothesis generators that leverage analogy-driven generalization for scientific innovation.
2025-10-25T14:25:26Z
Hongyu Guo
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22317v1
Memory-based Language Models: An Efficient, Explainable, and Eco-friendly Approach to Large Language Modeling
2025-10-25T14:34:18Z
We present memory-based language modeling as an efficient, eco-friendly alternative to deep neural network-based language modeling. It offers log-linearly scalable next-token prediction performance and strong memorization capabilities. Implementing fast approximations of k-nearest neighbor classification, memory-based language modeling leaves a relatively small ecological footprint both in training and in inference mode, as it relies fully on CPUs and attains low token latencies. Its internal workings are simple and fully transparent. We compare our implementation of memory-based language modeling, OLIFANT, with GPT-2 and GPT-Neo on next-token prediction accuracy, estimated emissions and speeds, and offer some deeper analyses of the model.
2025-10-25T14:34:18Z
15 pages, 11 figures
Antal van den Bosch
Ainhoa Risco Patón
Teun Buijse
Peter Berck
Maarten van Gompel
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22318v1
Harnessing the Power of Large Language Models for Software Testing Education: A Focus on ISTQB Syllabus
2025-10-25T14:45:58Z
Software testing is a critical component in the software engineering field and is important for software engineering education. Thus, it is vital for academia to continuously improve and update educational methods to reflect the current state of the field. The International Software Testing Qualifications Board (ISTQB) certification framework is globally recognized and widely adopted in industry and academia. However, ISTQB-based learning has been rarely applied with recent generative artificial intelligence advances. Despite the growing capabilities of large language models (LLMs), ISTQB-based learning and instruction with LLMs have not been thoroughly explored. This paper explores and evaluates how LLMs can complement the ISTQB framework for higher education. The findings present four key contributions: (i) the creation of a comprehensive ISTQB-aligned dataset spanning over a decade, consisting of 28 sample exams and 1,145 questions; (ii) the development of a domain-optimized prompt that enhances LLM precision and explanation quality on ISTQB tasks; (iii) a systematic evaluation of state-of-the-art LLMs on this dataset; and (iv) actionable insights and recommendations for integrating LLMs into software testing education. These findings highlight the promise of LLMs in supporting ISTQB certification preparation and offer a foundation for their broader use in software engineering at higher education.
2025-10-25T14:45:58Z
7 pages, 3 figures, 3 tables
Tuan-Phong Ngo
Bao-Ngoc Duong
Tuan-Anh Hoang
Joshua Dwight
Ushik Shrestha Khwakhali
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23652v1
The Structural Scalpel: Automated Contiguous Layer Pruning for Large Language Models
2025-10-25T16:40:17Z
Although large language models (LLMs) have achieved revolutionary breakthroughs in many fields, their large model size and high computational cost pose significant challenges for practical deployment on resource-constrained edge devices. To this end, layer pruning has been proposed to reduce the computational overhead by directly removing redundant layers. However, existing layer pruning methods typically rely on hand-crafted metrics to evaluate and remove individual layers, while ignoring the dependencies between layers. This can disrupt the model's information flow and severely degrade performance. To address these issues, we propose CLP, a novel continuous layer pruning framework that introduces two key innovations: a differentiable concave gate algorithm that automatically identifies the best continuous layer segments for pruning via gradient-based optimization; and a cutoff endpoint tuning strategy that effectively restores model performance by fine-tuning only the layers adjacent to the pruned segments. Extensive experiments across multiple model architectures (including LLaMA2, LLaMA3 and Qwen) and sizes (from $7$B to $70$B parameters) show that CLP significantly outperforms existing state-of-the-art baselines. For example, at a pruning rate of $20\%$, CLP achieves an average performance retention of $95.34\%$ on LLaMA3-70B, outperforming baselines by $4.29\%$-$30.52\%$. Furthermore, CLP can be seamlessly combined with quantization to further compress the model with only a slight performance loss.
2025-10-25T16:40:17Z
Yao Lu
Yuqi Li
Wenbin Xie
Shanqing Yu
Qi Xuan
Zhaowei Zhu
Shiping Wen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22362v1
Mapping Faithful Reasoning in Language Models
2025-10-25T16:48:19Z
Chain-of-thought (CoT) traces promise transparency for reasoning language models, but prior work shows they are not always faithful reflections of internal computation. This raises challenges for oversight: practitioners may misinterpret decorative reasoning as genuine. We introduce Concept Walk, a general framework for tracing how a model's internal stance evolves with respect to a concept direction during reasoning. Unlike surface text, Concept Walk operates in activation space, projecting each reasoning step onto the concept direction learned from contrastive data. This allows us to observe whether reasoning traces shape outcomes or are discarded. As a case study, we apply Concept Walk to the domain of Safety using Qwen 3-4B. We find that in 'easy' cases, perturbed CoTs are quickly ignored, indicating decorative reasoning, whereas in 'hard' cases, perturbations induce sustained shifts in internal activations, consistent with faithful reasoning. The contribution is methodological: Concept Walk provides a lens to re-examine faithfulness through concept-specific internal dynamics, helping identify when reasoning traces can be trusted and when they risk misleading practitioners.
2025-10-25T16:48:19Z
9 pages, Accepted to the Mechanistic Interpretability Workshop at NeurIPS 2025
Jiazheng Li
Andreas Damianou
J Rosser
José Luis Redondo García
Konstantina Palla
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22389v2
Can Small and Reasoning Large Language Models Score Journal Articles for Research Quality and Do Averaging and Few-shot Help?
2026-02-17T13:09:07Z
Previous research has shown that journal article quality ratings from the cloud based Large Language Model (LLM) families ChatGPT and Gemini and the medium sized open weights LLM Gemma3 27b correlate moderately with expert research quality scores. This article assesses whether other medium sized LLMs, smaller LLMs, and reasoning models have similar abilities. This is tested with Gemma3 variants, Llama4 Scout, Qwen3, Magistral Small and DeepSeek R1 on a dataset of 2,780 medical, health and life science papers in 6 fields, with two different gold standards, one novel. Few-shot and score averaging approaches are also evaluated. The results suggest that medium-sized LLMs have similar performance to ChatGPT 4o-mini and Gemini 2.0 Flash, but that 1b parameters may often, and 4b sometimes, be too few. Reasoning models did not have a clear advantage. Moreover, averaging scores from multiple identical queries seems to be a universally successful strategy, and there is weak evidence that few-shot prompts (four examples) tend to help. Overall, the results show, for the first time, that smaller LLMs >4b have a substantial capability to rate journal articles for research quality, especially if score averaging is used, but that reasoning does not give an advantage for this task; it is therefore not recommended because it is slow. The use of LLMs to support research evaluation is now more credible since multiple variants have a similar ability, including many that can be deployed offline in a secure environment without substantial computing resources.
2025-10-25T18:12:41Z
Thelwall, M. & Mohammadi, E. (2026). Can small and reasoning Large Language Models score journal articles for research quality and do averaging and few-shot help? Scientometrics
Mike Thelwall
Ehsan Mohammadi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22455v1
Evaluating Multimodal Large Language Models on Core Music Perception Tasks
2025-10-25T23:10:16Z
Multimodal Large Language Models (LLMs) claim "musical understanding" via evaluations that conflate listening with score reading. We benchmark three SOTA LLMs (Gemini 2.5 Pro, Gemini 2.5 Flash, and Qwen2.5-Omni) across three core music skills: Syncopation Scoring, Transposition Detection, and Chord Quality Identification. Moreover, we separate three sources of variability: (i) perceptual limitations (audio vs. MIDI inputs), (ii) exposure to examples (zero- vs. few-shot manipulations), and (iii) reasoning strategies (Standalone, CoT, LogicLM). For the latter we adapt LogicLM, a framework combining LLMs with symbolic solvers to perform structured reasoning, to music. Results reveal a clear perceptual gap: models perform near ceiling on MIDI but show accuracy drops on audio. Reasoning and few-shot prompting offer minimal gains. This is expected for MIDI, where performance reaches saturation, but more surprising for audio, where LogicLM, despite near-perfect MIDI accuracy, remains notably brittle. Among models, Gemini Pro achieves the highest performance across most conditions. Overall, current systems reason well over symbols (MIDI) but do not yet "listen" reliably from audio. Our method and dataset make the perception-reasoning boundary explicit and offer actionable guidance for building robust, audio-first music systems.
2025-10-25T23:10:16Z
Accepted to the NeurIPS 2025 Workshop on AI for Music (AI4Music), 16 pages, 1 figure, 3 tables
Brandon James Carone
Iran R. Roman
Pablo Ripollés
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22467v1
Backward-Friendly Optimization: Training Large Language Models with Approximate Gradients under Memory Constraints
2025-10-26T00:50:12Z
Full fine-tuning of Large Language Models (LLMs) is notoriously memory-intensive, primarily because conventional optimizers such as SGD or Adam assume access to exact gradients derived from cached activations. Existing solutions either alter the model architecture (e.g., reversible networks) or trade memory for computation (e.g., activation checkpointing), but the optimizer itself remains untouched. In this work, we introduce GradLite, a backward-friendly optimizer that relaxes the requirement of exact gradients, enabling efficient training even when intermediate activations are aggressively discarded or approximated. GradLite leverages two key techniques: (i) low-rank Jacobian approximation, which reduces the dimensionality of backpropagated error signals, and (ii) error-feedback correction, which accumulates and compensates approximation errors across iterations to preserve convergence guarantees. We provide a theoretical analysis showing that GradLite maintains unbiased gradient estimates with bounded variance, ensuring convergence rates comparable to Adam. Empirically, GradLite reduces optimizer-state and activation memory consumption by up to 50\% without architectural changes, and achieves on-par or superior downstream performance on reasoning (MMLU, GSM8K), multilingual, and dialogue benchmarks compared to checkpointing and optimizer-centric baselines (LoMo, GaLore).
2025-10-26T00:50:12Z
Jing Yang
Kaitong Cai
Yijia Fan
Yufeng Yang
Keze Wang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22489v1
Frustratingly Easy Task-aware Pruning for Large Language Models
2025-10-26T02:09:22Z
Pruning provides a practical solution to reduce the resources required to run large language models (LLMs) to benefit from their effective capabilities as well as control their cost for training and inference. Research on LLM pruning often ranks the importance of LLM parameters using their magnitudes and calibration-data activations and removes (or masks) the less important ones, accordingly reducing LLMs' size. However, these approaches primarily focus on preserving the LLM's ability to generate fluent sentences, while neglecting performance on specific domains and tasks. In this paper, we propose a simple yet effective pruning approach for LLMs that preserves task-specific capabilities while shrinking their parameter space. We first analyze how conventional pruning minimizes loss perturbation under general-domain calibration and extend this formulation by incorporating task-specific feature distributions into the importance computation of existing pruning algorithms. Thus, our framework computes separate importance scores using both general and task-specific calibration data, partitions parameters into shared and exclusive groups based on activation-norm differences, and then fuses their scores to guide the pruning process. This design enables our method to integrate seamlessly with various foundation pruning techniques and preserve the LLM's specialized abilities under compression. Experiments on widely used benchmarks demonstrate that our approach is effective and consistently outperforms the baselines with identical pruning ratios and different settings.
2025-10-26T02:09:22Z
8 pages, 3 figures
Yuanhe Tian
Junjie Liu
Xican Yang
Haishan Ye
Yan Song
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23658v2
Aligning Diffusion Language Models via Unpaired Preference Optimization
2025-11-12T08:06:00Z
Diffusion language models (dLLMs) are an emerging alternative to autoregressive (AR) generators, but aligning them to human preferences is challenging because sequence log-likelihoods are intractable and pairwise preference data are costly to collect. We introduce ELBO-KTO, which combines an ELBO surrogate for diffusion log-likelihoods with a prospect-theoretic, unpaired preference objective (Kahneman Tversky Optimization, KTO). We analyze the bias and variance induced by the ELBO substitution and employ variance-reduction practices that stabilize gradients during training. Applied to LLaDA-8B-Instruct, ELBO-KTO yields 65.9% and 62.3% adjusted win rates on kto-mix-14k and UltraFeedback-Binary, respectively, versus the base model under an automatic LLM judge. Across downstream tasks, including GSM8K, MMLU, and additional reasoning/knowledge benchmarks, ELBO-KTO trained on UltraFeedback-Binary performs on par with or better than the base model under identical decoding. This establishes unpaired preference optimization as a viable alternative to pairwise alignment in diffusion LLMs.
2025-10-26T03:02:39Z
Vaibhav Jindal
Hejian Sang
Chun-Mao Lai
Yanning Chen
Zhipeng Wang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22571v1
STATUS Bench: A Rigorous Benchmark for Evaluating Object State Understanding in Vision-Language Models
2025-10-26T08:04:28Z
Object state recognition aims to identify the specific condition of objects, such as their positional states (e.g., open or closed) and functional states (e.g., on or off). While recent Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are capable of performing a variety of multimodal tasks, it remains unclear how precisely they can identify object states. To alleviate this issue, we introduce the STAte and Transition UnderStanding Benchmark (STATUS Bench), the first benchmark for rigorously evaluating the ability of VLMs to understand subtle variations in object states in diverse situations. Specifically, STATUS Bench introduces a novel evaluation scheme that requires VLMs to perform three tasks simultaneously: object state identification (OSI), image retrieval (IR), and state change identification (SCI). These tasks are defined over our fully hand-crafted dataset involving image pairs, their corresponding object state descriptions and state change descriptions. Furthermore, we introduce a large-scale training dataset, namely STATUS Train, which consists of 13 million semi-automatically created descriptions. This dataset serves as the largest resource to facilitate further research in this area. In our experiments, we demonstrate that STATUS Bench enables rigorous consistency evaluation and reveal that current state-of-the-art VLMs still significantly struggle to capture subtle object state distinctions. Surprisingly, under the proposed rigorous evaluation scheme, most open-weight VLMs exhibited chance-level zero-shot performance. After fine-tuning on STATUS Train, Qwen2.5-VL achieved performance comparable to Gemini 2.0 Flash. These findings underscore the necessity of STATUS Bench and Train for advancing object state recognition in VLM research.
2025-10-26T08:04:28Z
Mahiro Ukai
Shuhei Kurita
Nakamasa Inoue
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23663v1
AI-Driven Carbon Monitoring: Transformer-Based Reconstruction of Atmospheric CO2 in Canadian Poultry Regions
2025-10-26T10:41:12Z
Accurate mapping of column-averaged CO2 (XCO2) over agricultural landscapes is essential for guiding emission mitigation strategies. We present a Spatiotemporal Vision Transformer with Wavelets (ST-ViWT) framework that reconstructs continuous, uncertainty-quantified XCO2 fields from OCO-2 across southern Canada, emphasizing poultry-intensive regions. The model fuses wavelet time-frequency representations with transformer attention over meteorology, vegetation indices, topography, and land cover. On 2024 OCO-2 data, ST-ViWT attains R2 = 0.984 and RMSE = 0.468 ppm; 92.3 percent of gap-filled predictions lie within +/-1 ppm. Independent validation with TCCON shows robust generalization (bias = -0.14 ppm; r = 0.928), including faithful reproduction of the late-summer drawdown. Spatial analysis across 14 poultry regions reveals a moderate positive association between facility density and XCO2 (r = 0.43); high-density areas exhibit larger seasonal amplitudes (9.57 ppm) and enhanced summer variability. Compared with conventional interpolation and standard machine-learning baselines, ST-ViWT yields seamless 0.25 degree CO2 surfaces with explicit uncertainties, enabling year-round coverage despite sparse observations. The approach supports integration of satellite constraints with national inventories and precision livestock platforms to benchmark emissions, refine region-specific factors, and verify interventions. Importantly, transformer-based Earth observation enables scalable, transparent, spatially explicit carbon accounting, hotspot prioritization, and policy-relevant mitigation assessment.
2025-10-26T10:41:12Z
Padmanabhan Jagannathan Prajesh
Kaliaperumal Ragunath
Miriam Gordon
Bruce Rathgeber
Suresh Neethirajan
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22641v1
FastVLM: Self-Speculative Decoding for Fast Vision-Language Model Inference
2025-10-26T11:49:20Z
Vision-language Models (VLMs) have made significant strides in visual understanding and query response generation, but often face challenges of high computational cost and inference latency due to autoregressive decoding. In this work, we introduce an imitation-learning-based Self-Speculative Decoding (SSD) framework, named FastVLM, to address these limitations. Our approach employs a lightweight draft model for token generation in an autoregressive manner, while a full model verifies these tokens non-autoregressively. Accepted tokens proceed seamlessly, while rejected tokens are corrected by the full model and used to guide the draft model's refinement. Through an imitation network, FastVLM enhances the draft model by integrating deeper level insights from the full model's architecture. Also, it maintains the performance integrity of the full model while training the draft model, achieving a balance between efficiency and accuracy. Our method speeds up the inference process by 1.55-1.85x as compared to the final layer with minimal loss in performance.
2025-10-26T11:49:20Z
Accepted for presentation at the main Conference IJCNLP-AACL 2025
Divya Jyoti Bajpai
Manjesh Kumar Hanawal
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22706v3
IGGT: Instance-Grounded Geometry Transformer for Semantic 3D Reconstruction
2025-10-31T03:22:16Z
Humans naturally perceive the geometric structure and semantic content of a 3D world as intertwined dimensions, enabling coherent and accurate understanding of complex scenes. However, most prior approaches prioritize training large geometry models for low-level 3D reconstruction and treat high-level spatial understanding in isolation, overlooking the crucial interplay between these two fundamental aspects of 3D-scene analysis, thereby limiting generalization and leading to poor performance in downstream 3D understanding tasks. Recent attempts have mitigated this issue by simply aligning 3D models with specific language models, thus restricting perception to the aligned model's capacity and limiting adaptability to downstream tasks. In this paper, we propose InstanceGrounded Geometry Transformer (IGGT), an end-to-end large unified transformer to unify the knowledge for both spatial reconstruction and instance-level contextual understanding. Specifically, we design a 3D-Consistent Contrastive Learning strategy that guides IGGT to encode a unified representation with geometric structures and instance-grounded clustering through only 2D visual inputs. This representation supports consistent lifting of 2D visual inputs into a coherent 3D scene with explicitly distinct object instances. To facilitate this task, we further construct InsScene-15K, a large-scale dataset with high-quality RGB images, poses, depth maps, and 3D-consistent instance-level mask annotations with a novel data curation pipeline.
2025-10-26T14:57:44Z
https://github.com/lifuguan/IGGT_official
Hao Li
Zhengyu Zou
Fangfu Liu
Xuanyang Zhang
Fangzhou Hong
Yukang Cao
Yushi Lan
Manyuan Zhang
Gang Yu
Dingwen Zhang
Ziwei Liu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22743v1
ConMatFormer: A Multi-attention and Transformer Integrated ConvNext based Deep Learning Model for Enhanced Diabetic Foot Ulcer Classification
2025-10-26T16:34:43Z
Diabetic foot ulcer (DFU) detection is a clinically significant yet challenging task due to the scarcity and variability of publicly available datasets. To solve these problems, we propose ConMatFormer, a new hybrid deep learning architecture that combines ConvNeXt blocks, multiple attention mechanisms convolutional block attention module (CBAM) and dual attention network (DANet), and transformer modules in a way that works together. This design facilitates the extraction of better local features and understanding of the global context, which allows us to model small skin patterns across different types of DFU very accurately. To address the class imbalance, we used data augmentation methods. A ConvNeXt block was used to obtain detailed local features in the initial stages. Subsequently, we compiled the model by adding a transformer module to enhance long-range dependency. This enabled us to pinpoint the DFU classes that were underrepresented or constituted minorities. Tests on the DS1 (DFUC2021) and DS2 (diabetic foot ulcer (DFU)) datasets showed that ConMatFormer outperformed state-of-the-art (SOTA) convolutional neural network (CNN) and Vision Transformer (ViT) models in terms of accuracy, reliability, and flexibility. The proposed method achieved an accuracy of 0.8961 and a precision of 0.9160 in a single experiment, which is a significant improvement over the current standards for classifying DFUs. In addition, by 4-fold cross-validation, the proposed model achieved an accuracy of 0.9755 with a standard deviation of only 0.0031. We further applied explainable artificial intelligence (XAI) methods, such as Grad-CAM, Grad-CAM++, and LIME, to consistently monitor the transparency and trustworthiness of the decision-making process.. Our findings set a new benchmark for DFU classification and provide a hybrid attention transformer framework for medical image analysis.
2025-10-26T16:34:43Z
Raihan Ahamed Rifat
Fuyad Hasan Bhoyan
Md Humaion Kabir Mehedi
Md Kaviul Hossain
Md. Jakir Hossen
M. F. Mridha
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22747v3
Low-Resource Dialect Adaptation of Large Language Models: A French Dialect Case-Study
2026-02-27T00:44:34Z
Despite the widespread adoption of Large Language Models (LLMs), their strongest capabilities remain largely confined to a small number of high-resource languages for which there is abundant training data. Recently, continual pre-training (CPT) has emerged as a means to fine-tune these models to low-resource regional dialects. In this paper, we study the use of CPT for dialect learning under tight data and compute budgets. Using low-rank adaptation (LoRA) and compute-efficient continual pre-training, we adapt three LLMs to the Québec French dialect using a very small dataset and benchmark them on the COLE suite. Our experiments demonstrate an improvement on the minority dialect benchmarks with minimal regression on the prestige language benchmarks with around 1% of model parameters updated. Analysis of the results demonstrate that gains are highly contingent on corpus composition. These findings indicate that CPT with parameter-efficient fine-tuning (PEFT) can narrow the dialect gap by providing cost-effective and sustainable language resource creation, expanding high-quality LLM access to minority linguistic communities. To support reproducibility and broaden access, we release the first Québec French LLMs on Hugging Face.
2025-10-26T16:49:06Z
Accepted at LREC 2026
Eeham Khan
Firas Saidani
Owen Van Esbroeck
Richard Khoury
Leila Kosseim
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22758v2
EchoMind: An Interrelated Multi-level Benchmark for Evaluating Empathetic Speech Language Models
2026-03-05T07:37:17Z
Speech Language Models (SLMs) have made significant progress in spoken language understanding. Yet it remains unclear whether they can fully perceive non lexical vocal cues alongside spoken words, and respond with empathy that aligns with both emotional and contextual factors. Existing benchmarks typically evaluate linguistic, acoustic, reasoning, or dialogue abilities in isolation, overlooking the integration of these skills that is crucial for human-like, emotionally intelligent conversation. We present EchoMind, the first interrelated, multi-level benchmark that simulates the cognitive process of empathetic dialogue through sequential, context-linked tasks: spoken-content understanding, vocal-cue perception, integrated reasoning, and response generation. All tasks share identical and semantically neutral scripts that are free of explicit emotional or contextual cues, and controlled variations in vocal style are used to test the effect of delivery independent of the transcript. EchoMind is grounded in an empathy-oriented framework spanning 3 coarse and 12 fine-grained dimensions, encompassing 39 vocal attributes, and evaluated using both objective and subjective metrics. Testing 12 advanced SLMs reveals that even state-of-the-art models struggle with high-expressive vocal cues, limiting empathetic response quality. Analyses of prompt strength, speech source, and ideal vocal cue recognition reveal persistent weaknesses in instruction-following, resilience to natural speech variability, and effective use of vocal cues for empathy. These results underscore the need for SLMs that integrate linguistic content with diverse vocal cues to achieve truly empathetic conversational ability.
2025-10-26T17:15:56Z
Speech Language Models, Spoken Language Understanding, Vocal Cue Perception, Empathetic Dialogue, Benchmark Evaluation; Accepted by ICLR 2026
Li Zhou
Lutong Yu
You Lyu
Yihang Lin
Zefeng Zhao
Junyi Ao
Yuhao Zhang
Benyou Wang
Haizhou Li
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22785v1
Self-Calibrated Consistency can Fight Back for Adversarial Robustness in Vision-Language Models
2025-10-26T18:37:12Z
Pre-trained vision-language models (VLMs) such as CLIP have demonstrated strong zero-shot capabilities across diverse domains, yet remain highly vulnerable to adversarial perturbations that disrupt image-text alignment and compromise reliability. Existing defenses typically rely on adversarial fine-tuning with labeled data, limiting their applicability in zero-shot settings. In this work, we identify two key weaknesses of current CLIP adversarial attacks -- lack of semantic guidance and vulnerability to view variations -- collectively termed semantic and viewpoint fragility. To address these challenges, we propose Self-Calibrated Consistency (SCC), an effective test-time defense. SCC consists of two complementary modules: Semantic consistency, which leverages soft pseudo-labels from counterattack warm-up and multi-view predictions to regularize cross-modal alignment and separate the target embedding from confusable negatives; and Spatial consistency, aligning perturbed visual predictions via augmented views to stabilize inference under adversarial perturbations. Together, these modules form a plug-and-play inference strategy. Extensive experiments on 22 benchmarks under diverse attack settings show that SCC consistently improves the zero-shot robustness of CLIP while maintaining accuracy, and can be seamlessly integrated with other VLMs for further gains. These findings highlight the great potential of establishing an adversarially robust paradigm from CLIP, with implications extending to broader vision-language domains such as BioMedCLIP.
2025-10-26T18:37:12Z
Jiaxiang Liu
Jiawei Du
Xiao Liu
Prayag Tiwari
Mingkun Xu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22798v1
VEHME: A Vision-Language Model For Evaluating Handwritten Mathematics Expressions
2025-10-26T19:03:27Z
Automatically assessing handwritten mathematical solutions is an important problem in educational technology with practical applications, but it remains a significant challenge due to the diverse formats, unstructured layouts, and symbolic complexity of student work. To address this challenge, we introduce VEHME-a Vision-Language Model for Evaluating Handwritten Mathematics Expressions-designed to assess open-form handwritten math responses with high accuracy and interpretable reasoning traces. VEHME integrates a two-phase training pipeline: (i) supervised fine-tuning using structured reasoning data, and (ii) reinforcement learning that aligns model outputs with multi-dimensional grading objectives, including correctness, reasoning depth, and error localization. To enhance spatial understanding, we propose an Expression-Aware Visual Prompting Module, trained on our synthesized multi-line math expressions dataset to robustly guide attention in visually heterogeneous inputs. Evaluated on AIHub and FERMAT datasets, VEHME achieves state-of-the-art performance among open-source models and approaches the accuracy of proprietary systems, demonstrating its potential as a scalable and accessible tool for automated math assessment. Our training and experiment code is publicly available at our GitHub repository.
2025-10-26T19:03:27Z
EMNLP 2025. Project Website: https://vehme.github.io/
Thu Phuong Nguyen
Duc M. Nguyen
Hyotaek Jeon
Hyunwook Lee
Hyunmin Song
Sungahn Ko
Taehwan Kim
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22823v1
Cross-Lingual Stability and Bias in Instruction-Tuned Language Models for Humanitarian NLP
2025-10-26T20:32:25Z
Humanitarian organizations face a critical choice: invest in costly commercial APIs or rely on free open-weight models for multilingual human rights monitoring. While commercial systems offer reliability, open-weight alternatives lack empirical validation -- especially for low-resource languages common in conflict zones. This paper presents the first systematic comparison of commercial and open-weight large language models (LLMs) for human-rights-violation detection across seven languages, quantifying the cost-reliability trade-off facing resource-constrained organizations. Across 78,000 multilingual inferences, we evaluate six models -- four instruction-aligned (Claude-Sonnet-4, DeepSeek-V3, Gemini-Flash-2.0, GPT-4.1-mini) and two open-weight (LLaMA-3-8B, Mistral-7B) -- using both standard classification metrics and new measures of cross-lingual reliability: Calibration Deviation (CD), Decision Bias (B), Language Robustness Score (LRS), and Language Stability Score (LSS). Results show that alignment, not scale, determines stability: aligned models maintain near-invariant accuracy and balanced calibration across typologically distant and low-resource languages (e.g., Lingala, Burmese), while open-weight models exhibit significant prompt-language sensitivity and calibration drift. These findings demonstrate that multilingual alignment enables language-agnostic reasoning and provide practical guidance for humanitarian organizations balancing budget constraints with reliability in multilingual deployment.
2025-10-26T20:32:25Z
Poli Nemkova
Amrit Adhikari
Matthew Pearson
Vamsi Krishna Sadu
Mark V. Albert
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22838v1
Semantic-Preserving Cross-Style Visual Reasoning for Robust Multi-Modal Understanding in Large Vision-Language Models
2025-10-26T21:11:46Z
The "style trap" poses a significant challenge for Large Vision-Language Models (LVLMs), hindering robust semantic understanding across diverse visual styles, especially in in-context learning (ICL). Existing methods often fail to effectively decouple style from content, hindering generalization. To address this, we propose the Semantic-Preserving Cross-Style Visual Reasoner (SP-CSVR), a novel framework for stable semantic understanding and adaptive cross-style visual reasoning. SP-CSVR integrates a Cross-Style Feature Encoder (CSFE) for style-content disentanglement, a Semantic-Aligned In-Context Decoder (SAICD) for efficient few-shot style adaptation, and an Adaptive Semantic Consistency Module (ASCM) employing multi-task contrastive learning to enforce cross-style semantic invariance. Extensive experiments on a challenging multi-style dataset demonstrate SP-CSVR's state-of-the-art performance across visual captioning, visual question answering, and in-context style adaptation. Comprehensive evaluations, including ablation studies and generalization analysis, confirm SP-CSVR's efficacy in enhancing robustness, generalization, and efficiency across diverse visual styles.
2025-10-26T21:11:46Z
Aya Nakayama
Brian Wong
Yuji Nishimura
Kaito Tanaka
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22852v1
Encoder-Decoder Diffusion Language Models for Efficient Training and Inference
2025-10-26T22:05:22Z
Discrete diffusion models enable parallel token sampling for faster inference than autoregressive approaches. However, prior diffusion models use a decoder-only architecture, which requires sampling algorithms that invoke the full network at every denoising step and incur high computational cost. Our key insight is that discrete diffusion models perform two types of computation: 1) representing clean tokens and 2) denoising corrupted tokens, which enables us to use separate modules for each task. We propose an encoder-decoder architecture to accelerate discrete diffusion inference, which relies on an encoder to represent clean tokens and a lightweight decoder to iteratively refine a noised sequence. We also show that this architecture enables faster training of block diffusion models, which partition sequences into blocks for better quality and are commonly used in diffusion language model inference. We introduce a framework for Efficient Encoder-Decoder Diffusion (E2D2), consisting of an architecture with specialized training and sampling algorithms, and we show that E2D2 achieves superior trade-offs between generation quality and inference throughput on summarization, translation, and mathematical reasoning tasks. We provide the code, model weights, and blog post on the project page: https://m-arriola.com/e2d2
2025-10-26T22:05:22Z
NeurIPS 2025. We provide the code at https://github.com/kuleshov-group/e2d2
Marianne Arriola
Yair Schiff
Hao Phung
Aaron Gokaslan
Volodymyr Kuleshov
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.24784v1
Sub-microsecond Transformers for Jet Tagging on FPGAs
2025-10-26T23:13:00Z
We present the first sub-microsecond transformer implementation on an FPGA achieving competitive performance for state-of-the-art high-energy physics benchmarks. Transformers have shown exceptional performance on multiple tasks in modern machine learning applications, including jet tagging at the CERN Large Hadron Collider (LHC). However, their computational complexity prohibits use in real-time applications, such as the hardware trigger system of the collider experiments up until now. In this work, we demonstrate the first application of transformers for jet tagging on FPGAs, achieving $\mathcal{O}(100)$ nanosecond latency with superior performance compared to alternative baseline models. We leverage high-granularity quantization and distributed arithmetic optimization to fit the entire transformer model on a single FPGA, achieving the required throughput and latency. Furthermore, we add multi-head attention and linear attention support to hls4ml, making our work accessible to the broader fast machine learning community. This work advances the next-generation trigger systems for the High Luminosity LHC, enabling the use of transformers for real-time applications in high-energy physics and beyond.
2025-10-26T23:13:00Z
Lauri Laatu
Chang Sun
Arianna Cox
Abhijith Gandrakota
Benedikt Maier
Jennifer Ngadiuba
Zhiqiang Que
Wayne Luk
Maria Spiropulu
Alexander Tapper
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22868v2
Seeing the Unseen: Towards Training-Free Inspection for Wind Turbine Blades Using Knowledge-Augmented Vision Language Models
2026-08-01T15:11:14Z
Wind turbine blades operate in harsh environments, making timely damage detection essential for preventing failures and optimizing maintenance. Drone-based inspection and deep learning are promising, but typically depend on large, labeled datasets, which limit their ability to detect rare or evolving damage types. To address this, we propose a zero-shot-oriented inspection framework that integrates Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) with Vision-Language Models (VLM). A multimodal knowledge base is constructed, comprising technical documentation, representative reference images, and domain-specific guidelines. A hybrid text-image retriever with keyword-aware reranking assembles the most relevant context to condition the VLM at inference, injecting domain knowledge without task-specific training. We evaluate the framework on 30 labeled blade images covering diverse damage categories. Although the dataset is small due to the difficulty of acquiring verified blade imagery, it covers multiple representative defect types. On this test set, the RAG-grounded VLM correctly classified all samples, whereas the same VLM without retrieval performed worse in both accuracy and precision. We further compare against open-vocabulary baselines and incorporate uncertainty Clopper-Pearson confidence intervals to account for the small-sample setting. Ablation studies indicate that the key advantage of the framework lies in explainability and generalizability: retrieved references ground the reasoning process and enable the detection of previously unseen defects by leveraging domain knowledge rather than relying solely on visual cues. This research contributes a data-efficient solution for industrial inspection that reduces dependence on extensive labeled datasets.
2025-10-26T23:19:28Z
Yang Zhang
Qianyu Zhou
Farhad Imani
Jiong Tang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22926v2
Simple Denoising Diffusion Language Models
2026-02-03T14:28:06Z
Recent Uniform State Diffusion Models (USDMs), initialized from a uniform prior, offer the promise of fast text generation due to their inherent self-correction ability compared to masked diffusion models. However, they still rely on complex loss formulations with additional computational overhead, which hinders scalability. In this work, we explore a simplified denoising-based loss for USDMs that optimizes only noise-replaced tokens, stabilizing training while matching the performance of prior methods with more complex objectives. In addition, we introduce an efficient regularization term to mitigate corruption toward uniform output distributions, which further improves performance. We demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of our simple and improved loss formulations by pretraining models on widely used text datasets for USDMs. More importantly, our conclusions scale to larger models, showing strong potential for large-scale training.
2025-10-27T02:05:26Z
Huaisheng Zhu
Zhengyu Chen
Shijie Zhou
Zhihui Xie
Yige Yuan
Shiqi Chen
Zhimeng Guo
Siyuan Xu
Hangfan Zhang
Vasant Honavar
Teng Xiao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22931v2
Robust Uncertainty Quantification for Self-Evolving Large Language Models via Continual Domain Pretraining
2025-10-28T15:51:13Z
Continual Learning (CL) is essential for enabling self-evolving large language models (LLMs) to adapt and remain effective amid rapid knowledge growth. Yet, despite its importance, little attention has been given to establishing statistical reliability guarantees for LLMs under CL, particularly in the setting of continual domain pretraining (CDP). Conformal Prediction (CP) has shown promise in offering correctness guarantees for LLMs, but it faces major challenges in CDP: testing data often stems from unknown or shifting domain distributions, under which CP may no longer provide valid guarantees. Moreover, when high coverage is required, CP can yield excessively large prediction sets for unanswerable queries, reducing informativeness. To address these challenges, we introduce an adaptive rejection and non-exchangeable CP framework. Our method first estimates the distribution of questions across domains in the test set using transformer-based clustering, then reweights or resamples the calibration data accordingly. Building on this, adaptive rejection CP allows the LLM to selectively abstain from answering when its confidence or competence shifts significantly. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our framework enhances both the effectiveness and reliability of CP under CDP scenarios. Our code is available at: https://anonymous.4open.science/r/CPCL-8C12/
2025-10-27T02:15:51Z
Xiaofan Zhou
Lu Cheng
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22936v2
PPE: Positional Preservation Embedding for Token Compression in Multimodal Large Language Models
2026-02-05T08:25:22Z
Multimodal large language models (MLLMs) have achieved strong performance on vision-language tasks, yet often suffer from inefficiencies due to redundant visual tokens. Existing token merging methods reduce sequence length but frequently disrupt spatial layouts and temporal continuity by disregarding positional relationships. In this work, we propose a novel encoding operator dubbed as \textbf{P}ositional \textbf{P}reservation \textbf{E}mbedding (\textbf{PPE}), which has the main hallmark of preservation of spatiotemporal structure during visual token compression. PPE explicitly introduces the disentangled encoding of 3D positions in the token dimension, enabling each compressed token to encapsulate different positions from multiple original tokens. Furthermore, we show that PPE can effectively support cascade clustering -- a progressive token compression strategy that leads to better performance retention. PPE is a parameter-free and generic operator that can be seamlessly integrated into existing token merging methods without any adjustments. Applied to state-of-the-art token merging framework, PPE achieves consistent improvements of $2\%\sim5\%$ across multiple vision-language benchmarks, including MMBench (general vision understanding), TextVQA (layout understanding) and VideoMME (temporal understanding). These results demonstrate that preserving positional cues is critical for efficient and effective MLLM reasoning. Our code is available at https://github.com/MouxiaoHuang/PPE.
2025-10-27T02:40:02Z
ICLR 2026
Mouxiao Huang
Borui Jiang
Dehua Zheng
Hailin Hu
Kai Han
Xinghao Chen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22956v1
Tagging-Augmented Generation: Assisting Language Models in Finding Intricate Knowledge In Long Contexts
2025-10-27T03:23:25Z
Recent investigations into effective context lengths of modern flagship large language models (LLMs) have revealed major limitations in effective question answering (QA) and reasoning over long and complex contexts for even the largest and most impressive cadre of models. While approaches like retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) and chunk-based re-ranking attempt to mitigate this issue, they are sensitive to chunking, embedding and retrieval strategies and models, and furthermore, rely on extensive pre-processing, knowledge acquisition and indexing steps. In this paper, we propose Tagging-Augmented Generation (TAG), a lightweight data augmentation strategy that boosts LLM performance in long-context scenarios, without degrading and altering the integrity and composition of retrieved documents. We validate our hypothesis by augmenting two challenging and directly relevant question-answering benchmarks -- NoLima and NovelQA -- and show that tagging the context or even just adding tag definitions into QA prompts leads to consistent performance gains over the baseline -- up to 17% for 32K token contexts, and 2.9% in complex reasoning question-answering for multi-hop queries requiring knowledge across a wide span of text. Additional details are available at https://sites.google.com/view/tag-emnlp.
2025-10-27T03:23:25Z
Paper accepted at EMNLP 2025
Anwesan Pal
Karen Hovsepian
Tinghao Guo
Mengnan Zhao
Somendra Tripathi
Nikos Kanakaris
George Mihaila
Sumit Nigam
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.22993v1
Can Language Models Compose Skills In-Context?
2025-10-27T04:18:59Z
Composing basic skills from simple tasks to accomplish composite tasks is crucial for modern intelligent systems. We investigate the in-context composition ability of language models to perform composite tasks that combine basic skills demonstrated in in-context examples. This is more challenging than the standard setting, where skills and their composition can be learned in training. We conduct systematic experiments on various representative open-source language models, utilizing linguistic and logical tasks designed to probe composition abilities. The results reveal that simple task examples can have a surprising negative impact on the performance, because the models generally struggle to recognize and assemble the skills correctly, even with Chain-of-Thought examples. Theoretical analysis further shows that it is crucial to align examples with the corresponding steps in the composition. This inspires a method for the probing tasks, whose improved performance provides positive support for our insights.
2025-10-27T04:18:59Z
Zidong Liu
Zhuoyan Xu
Zhenmei Shi
Yingyu Liang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23006v2
Understanding In-Context Learning Beyond Transformers: An Investigation of State Space and Hybrid Architectures
2026-02-26T21:09:21Z
We perform in-depth evaluations of in-context learning (ICL) on state-of-the-art transformer, state-space, and hybrid large language models over two categories of knowledge-based ICL tasks. Using a combination of behavioral probing and intervention-based methods, we have discovered that, while LLMs of different architectures can behave similarly in task performance, their internals could remain different. We discover that function vectors (FVs) responsible for ICL are primarily located in the self-attention and Mamba layers, and speculate that Mamba2 uses a different mechanism from FVs to perform ICL. FVs are more important for ICL involving parametric knowledge retrieval, but not for contextual knowledge understanding. Our work contributes to a more nuanced understanding across architectures and task types. Methodologically, our approach also highlights the importance of combining both behavioural and mechanistic analyses to investigate LLM capabilities.
2025-10-27T04:49:01Z
Shenran Wang
Timothy Tin-Long Tse
Jian Zhu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23095v3
Revisiting Multimodal Positional Encoding in Vision-Language Models
2026-04-06T07:18:15Z
Multimodal position encoding is essential for vision-language models, yet there has been little systematic investigation into multimodal position encoding. We conduct a comprehensive analysis of multimodal Rotary Positional Embedding (RoPE) by examining its two core components: position design and frequency allocation. Through extensive experiments, we identify three key guidelines: positional coherence, full frequency utilization, and preservation of textual priors-ensuring unambiguous layout, rich representation, and faithful transfer from the pre-trained LLM. Based on these insights, we propose Multi-Head RoPE (MHRoPE) and MRoPE-Interleave (MRoPE-I), two simple and plug-and-play variants that require no architectural changes. Our methods consistently outperform existing approaches across diverse benchmarks, with significant improvements in both general and fine-grained multimodal understanding. Code will be avaliable at https://github.com/JJJYmmm/Multimodal-RoPEs.
2025-10-27T08:00:46Z
16 pages
Jie Huang
Xuejing Liu
Sibo Song
Ruibing Hou
Hong Chang
Junyang Lin
Shuai Bai
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23144v1
DQ3D: Depth-guided Query for Transformer-Based 3D Object Detection in Traffic Scenarios
2025-10-27T09:20:59Z
3D object detection from multi-view images in traffic scenarios has garnered significant attention in recent years. Many existing approaches rely on object queries that are generated from 3D reference points to localize objects. However, a limitation of these methods is that some reference points are often far from the target object, which can lead to false positive detections. In this paper, we propose a depth-guided query generator for 3D object detection (DQ3D) that leverages depth information and 2D detections to ensure that reference points are sampled from the surface or interior of the object. Furthermore, to address partially occluded objects in current frame, we introduce a hybrid attention mechanism that fuses historical detection results with depth-guided queries, thereby forming hybrid queries. Evaluation on the nuScenes dataset demonstrates that our method outperforms the baseline by 6.3\% in terms of mean Average Precision (mAP) and 4.3\% in the NuScenes Detection Score (NDS).
2025-10-27T09:20:59Z
Ziyu Wang
Wenhao Li
Ji Wu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23182v1
SI-Bench: Benchmarking Social Intelligence of Large Language Models in Human-to-Human Conversations
2025-10-27T10:21:46Z
As large language models (LLMs) develop anthropomorphic abilities, they are increasingly being deployed as autonomous agents to interact with humans. However, evaluating their performance in realistic and complex social interactions remains a significant challenge. Most previous research built datasets through simulated agent-to-agent interactions, which fails to capture the authentic linguistic styles and relational dynamics found in real human conversations. To address this gap, we introduce SI-Bench, a novel benchmark designed to evaluate aspects of social intelligence in LLMs. Grounded in broad social science theories, SI-Bench contains 2,221 authentic multi-turn dialogues collected from a social networking application. We further selected a subset of 312 dialogues for manual annotation across 8 major models. The experiments show that SOTA models have surpassed the human expert in process reasoning under complex social situations, yet they still fall behind humans in reply quality. Moreover, introducing Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning may degrade the performance of LLMs in social dialogue tasks. All datasets are openly available at https://github.com/SI-Bench/SI-Bench.git.
2025-10-27T10:21:46Z
17 pages, 9 figures
Shuai Huang
Wenxuan Zhao
Jun Gao
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.24792v2
PISA-Bench: The PISA Index as a Multilingual and Multimodal Metric for the Evaluation of Vision-Language Models
2025-11-12T09:22:27Z
Vision-language models (VLMs) have demonstrated remarkable progress in multimodal reasoning. However, existing benchmarks remain limited in terms of high-quality, human-verified examples. Many current datasets rely on synthetically generated content by large language models (LLMs). Furthermore, most datasets are limited to English, as manual quality assurance of translated samples is time-consuming and costly. To fill this gap, we introduce PISA-Bench, a multilingual benchmark derived from English examples of the expert-created PISA tests, a unified framework for the assessment of student competencies in over eighty countries. Each example consists of human-extracted instructions, questions, answer options, and images, enriched with question type categories, and has been translated from English into five additional languages (Spanish, German, Chinese, French, and Italian), resulting in a fully parallel corpus covering six languages. We evaluate state-of-the-art vision-language models on PISA-Bench and find that especially small models (<20B parameters) fail to achieve high test scores. We further find substantial performance degradation on non-English splits as well as high error-rates when models are tasked with spatial and geometric reasoning. By releasing the dataset and evaluation framework, we provide a resource for advancing research on multilingual multimodal reasoning.
2025-10-27T11:00:45Z
8 pages, 11 tables and figures
Patrick Haller
Fabio Barth
Jonas Golde
Georg Rehm
Alan Akbik
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23254v3
Optimal In-context Adaptivity and Distributional Robustness of Transformers
2026-05-07T10:47:24Z
We study in-context learning problems where a Transformer is pretrained on tasks drawn from a mixture distribution $π=\sum_{α\in\mathcal{A}} λ_α π_α$, called the pretraining prior, in which each mixture component $π_α$ is a distribution on tasks of a specific difficulty level indexed by $α$. Our goal is to understand the performance of the pretrained Transformer when evaluated on a different test distribution $μ$, consisting of tasks of fixed difficulty $β\in\mathcal{A}$, and with potential distribution shift relative to $π_β$, subject to the chi-squared divergence $χ^2(μ,π_β)$ being at most $κ$. In particular, we consider nonparametric regression problems with random smoothness, and multi-index models with both random smoothness and random effective dimension. We prove that a large Transformer pretrained on sufficient data achieves the optimal rate of convergence corresponding to the difficulty level $β$, uniformly over test distributions $μ$ in the chi-squared divergence ball. Thus, the pretrained Transformer is able to achieve faster rates of convergence on easier tasks and is robust to distribution shift at test time. Finally, we prove that even if an estimator had access to the test distribution $μ$, the convergence rate of its expected risk over $μ$ could not be faster than that of our pretrained Transformers, thereby providing a more appropriate optimality guarantee than minimax lower bounds.
2025-10-27T12:16:49Z
47 pages, 4 figures
Tianyi Ma
Tengyao Wang
Richard J. Samworth
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23271v1
Mubeen AI: A Specialized Arabic Language Model for Heritage Preservation and User Intent Understanding
2025-10-27T12:29:27Z
Mubeen is a proprietary Arabic language model developed by MASARAT SA, optimized for deep understanding of Arabic linguistics, Islamic studies, and cultural heritage. Trained on an extensive collection of authentic Arabic sources significantly expanded by digitizing historical manuscripts via a proprietary Arabic OCR engine, the model incorporates seminal scholarly works in linguistics, jurisprudence, hadith, and Quranic exegesis, alongside thousands of academic theses and peer-reviewed research papers. Conditioned through a deep linguistic engineering framework, Mubeen masters not just the meaning but the eloquence of Arabic, enabling precise understanding across classical texts, contemporary writing, and regional dialects with focus on comprehending user intent and delivering accurate, contextually relevant responses. Unlike other Arabic models relying on translated English data that often fail in intent detection or retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), Mubeen uses native Arabic sources to ensure cultural authenticity and accuracy. Its core innovation is the Practical Closure Architecture, designed to solve the "Utility Gap Crisis" where factually correct answers fail to resolve users' core needs, forcing them into frustrating cycles of re-prompting. By prioritizing clarity and decisive guidance, Mubeen transforms from an information repository into a decisive guide, aligning with Saudi Vision 2030. The model's architecture combines deep heritage specialization with multi-disciplinary expert modules, enabling robust performance across both cultural preservation and general knowledge domains.
2025-10-27T12:29:27Z
21 pages, 2 figures, 3 tables. Includes appendices on ethical guidelines and training framework. Submitted September 04, 2025
Mohammed Aljafari
Ismail Alturki
Ahmed Mori
Yehya Kadumi
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23334v1
Adaptive Blockwise Search: Inference-Time Alignment for Large Language Models
2025-10-27T13:48:59Z
LLM alignment remains a critical challenge. Inference-time methods provide a flexible alternative to fine-tuning, but their uniform computational effort often yields suboptimal alignment. We hypothesize that for many alignment tasks, the initial tokens of a response are disproportionately more critical. To leverage this principle, we introduce AdaSearch, a novel blockwise search strategy. It adaptively allocates a fixed computational budget using a sampling schedule, focusing search effort on these critical tokens. We apply AdaSearch to sequential decoding and introduce its tree-search counterpart, AdaBeam. Our comprehensive evaluation across eight LLMs demonstrates that AdaSearch outperforms strong Best-of-N and fine-tuning baselines. Specifically, win-rates improve by over 10% for harmlessness generation, controlled sentiment generation, and for mathematical reasoning tasks relative to Best-of-N.
2025-10-27T13:48:59Z
Mohammad Atif Quamar
Mohammad Areeb
Nishant Sharma
Ananth Shreekumar
Jonathan Rosenthal
Muslum Ozgur Ozmen
Mikhail Kuznetsov
Z. Berkay Celik
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23357v1
Large language model-based task planning for service robots: A review
2025-10-27T14:06:40Z
With the rapid advancement of large language models (LLMs) and robotics, service robots are increasingly becoming an integral part of daily life, offering a wide range of services in complex environments. To deliver these services intelligently and efficiently, robust and accurate task planning capabilities are essential. This paper presents a comprehensive overview of the integration of LLMs into service robotics, with a particular focus on their role in enhancing robotic task planning. First, the development and foundational techniques of LLMs, including pre-training, fine-tuning, retrieval-augmented generation (RAG), and prompt engineering, are reviewed. We then explore the application of LLMs as the cognitive core-`brain'-of service robots, discussing how LLMs contribute to improved autonomy and decision-making. Furthermore, recent advancements in LLM-driven task planning across various input modalities are analyzed, including text, visual, audio, and multimodal inputs. Finally, we summarize key challenges and limitations in current research and propose future directions to advance the task planning capabilities of service robots in complex, unstructured domestic environments. This review aims to serve as a valuable reference for researchers and practitioners in the fields of artificial intelligence and robotics.
2025-10-27T14:06:40Z
Submitted to Biomimetic Intelligence and Robotics for possible publication
Shaohan Bian
Ying Zhang
Guohui Tian
Zhiqiang Miao
Edmond Q. Wu
Simon X. Yang
Changchun Hua
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23497v3
VOLD: Reasoning Transfer from LLMs to Vision-Language Models via On-Policy Distillation
2026-06-03T18:11:47Z
Training vision-language models (VLMs) for complex reasoning remains a challenging task, i.a. due to the scarcity of high-quality image-text reasoning data. Conversely, text-based reasoning resources are abundant and scalable, but it is still an open question how to leveraging them for VLM reasoning. To address this problem, we propose VOLD, a framework to transfer reasoning capabilities from text-only teacher models to VLM student models. To this end, VOLD combines reinforcement learning via Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) with on-policy distillation, which allows the student reasoning traces to be guided by the teacher model, resulting in a significant gain over using GRPO alone. We further show that a cold-start alignment is essential for an effective transfer during the online training phase in this scenario and that without sufficient distributional alignment between teacher and student, on-policy distillation fails to provide meaningful guidance. We evaluate VOLD across diverse benchmarks including MMMU-Pro, MathVision, MathVista, and LogicVista, showing that VOLD outperforms the baseline model significantly and improves over the state of the art by a margin. Our ablation shows the importance of a cold-start alignment via SFT for on-policy distillation with a text-only teacher.
2025-10-27T16:32:12Z
www.walidbousselham.com/VOLD/
Walid Bousselham
Hilde Kuehne
Cordelia Schmid
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23554v1
A U-Net and Transformer Pipeline for Multilingual Image Translation
2025-10-27T17:28:55Z
This paper presents an end-to-end multilingual translation pipeline that integrates a custom U-Net for text detection, the Tesseract engine for text recognition, and a from-scratch sequence-to-sequence (Seq2Seq) Transformer for Neural Machine Translation (NMT). Our approach first utilizes a U-Net model, trained on a synthetic dataset , to accurately segment and detect text regions from an image. These detected regions are then processed by Tesseract to extract the source text. This extracted text is fed into a custom Transformer model trained from scratch on a multilingual parallel corpus spanning 5 languages. Unlike systems reliant on monolithic pre-trained models, our architecture emphasizes full customization and adaptability. The system is evaluated on its text detection accuracy, text recognition quality, and translation performance via BLEU scores. The complete pipeline demonstrates promising results, validating the viability of a custom-built system for translating text directly from images.
2025-10-27T17:28:55Z
6 pages, 3 figures, 5 tables, and 2 algorithms. Prepared in IEEE double-column format
Siddharth Sahay
Radhika Agarwal
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23585v1
Hope Speech Detection in Social Media English Corpora: Performance of Traditional and Transformer Models
2025-10-27T17:53:40Z
The identification of hope speech has become a promised NLP task, considering the need to detect motivational expressions of agency and goal-directed behaviour on social media platforms. This proposal evaluates traditional machine learning models and fine-tuned transformers for a previously split hope speech dataset as train, development and test set. On development test, a linear-kernel SVM and logistic regression both reached a macro-F1 of 0.78; SVM with RBF kernel reached 0.77, and Naïve Bayes hit 0.75. Transformer models delivered better results, the best model achieved weighted precision of 0.82, weighted recall of 0.80, weighted F1 of 0.79, macro F1 of 0.79, and 0.80 accuracy. These results suggest that while optimally configured traditional machine learning models remain agile, transformer architectures detect some subtle semantics of hope to achieve higher precision and recall in hope speech detection, suggesting that larges transformers and LLMs could perform better in small datasets.
2025-10-27T17:53:40Z
Luis Ramos
Hiram Calvo
Olga Kolesnikova
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.23588v2
FARMER: Flow AutoRegressive Transformer over Pixels
2025-10-30T07:38:54Z
Directly modeling the explicit likelihood of the raw data distribution is key topic in the machine learning area, which achieves the scaling successes in Large Language Models by autoregressive modeling. However, continuous AR modeling over visual pixel data suffer from extremely long sequences and high-dimensional spaces. In this paper, we present FARMER, a novel end-to-end generative framework that unifies Normalizing Flows (NF) and Autoregressive (AR) models for tractable likelihood estimation and high-quality image synthesis directly from raw pixels. FARMER employs an invertible autoregressive flow to transform images into latent sequences, whose distribution is modeled implicitly by an autoregressive model. To address the redundancy and complexity in pixel-level modeling, we propose a self-supervised dimension reduction scheme that partitions NF latent channels into informative and redundant groups, enabling more effective and efficient AR modeling. Furthermore, we design a one-step distillation scheme to significantly accelerate inference speed and introduce a resampling-based classifier-free guidance algorithm to boost image generation quality. Extensive experiments demonstrate that FARMER achieves competitive performance compared to existing pixel-based generative models while providing exact likelihoods and scalable training.
2025-10-27T17:54:08Z
Bytedance Seed Technical Report
Guangting Zheng
Qinyu Zhao
Tao Yang
Fei Xiao
Zhijie Lin
Jie Wu
Jiajun Deng
Yanyong Zhang
Rui Zhu