Artificial Impressions: Evaluating Large Language Model Behavior Through the Lens of Trait Impressions
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Background
3 Preliminary Study: Prompt-based Impressions
4 Methods
Overview.
Generating Impression Data.
Impression Probes.
5 Experimental Configuration
6 Results
6.1 RQ1: Artificial Impressions
6.2 RQ2: Impression-Conditioned Responses
6.3 RQ3: Factors Influencing Impressions
7 Related Work
8 Discussion and Conclusion
9 Acknowledgments
References
A Prompting Consistency Experiment
A.1 Additional Results
A.2 Non-Instruction-Tuned Models
B Additional Trait Examples
C Additional Examples Synthetic Messages
D Probe Details
D.1 Impression Probes
D.2 BOW Baselines
E Model Details
E.1 LLM-as-a-Judge
F Experimental Data Pre-processing
F.1 LMSysChat
F.2 TwitterAAE
G Human Judgment Details
G.1 Annotation Interface
G.2 Detailed Annotator Agreement
G.3 Full Human Judgment Results
H Full Probe Evaluation Results
H.1 MLP Activations
H.2 Residual Streams and Z Activations
I Full LLM Behavior Results
I.1 Response Quality
I.2 Hedging
J Statistical Models and Analyses
K Warmth and Competence Comparison
L IDP Analyses
L.1 Full LIWC Analysis: Generated Messages
L.2 Full Token-Level Analysis: Synthetic Messages
L.3 Full LIWC Analysis: LMSysChat
L.4 Full Token Analysis: LMSysChat
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2510.08915v1 [cs.CL] 10 Oct 2025
Artificial Impressions: Evaluating Large Language Model Behavior Through the Lens of Trait Impressions
Nicholas Deas
Affiliation: Columbia University, Department of Computer Science
Kathleen McKeown
Affiliation:
{ndeas, kathy}@cs.columbia.edu
Abstract
We introduce and study artificial impressions--patterns in LLMs’ internal representations of prompts that resemble human impressions and stereotypes based on language. We fit linear probes on generated prompts to predict impressions according to the two-dimensional Stereotype Content Model (SCM). Using these probes, we study the relationship between impressions and downstream model behavior as well as prompt features that may inform such impressions. We find that LLMs inconsistently report impressions when prompted, but also that impressions are more consistently linearly decodable from their hidden representations. Additionally, we show that artificial impressions of prompts are predictive of the quality and use of hedging in model responses.
We also investigate how particular content, stylistic, and
dialectal features in prompts impact LLM impressions. 11
1
Our code, select fitted probes, and information about data access are available at https://github.com/NickDeas/ArtificialImpressions
1 Introduction
People rapidly form initial impressions of others Mileva and Lavan (2023); Olivola and Todorov (2010), which have lasting impacts on attitudes and behaviors
such as interactions with strangers
and voting tendencies (e.g., Koppensteiner and Stephan 2014; Evans et al. 2000; Human et al. 2013). Similarly, stereotypes that
influence impressions can reinforce harmful societal perceptions
Bodenhausen and Wyer (1985); Wigboldus et al. (2003).
Figure 1: Overview of our approach. Because LLMs inconsistently report impressions of users, we fit probes to extract LLM artificial impressions of prompt authors according to the Stereotype Content Model.
Our perceptions of people (i.e., impressions) and groups (i.e., stereotypes)
reflect inferences made using a variety of characteristics, such as
facial Sutherland and Young (2022) or vocal McAleer et al. (2014) features.
Research on language attitudes similarly considers how linguistic variation is associated with
our perceptions
about speakers Dragojevic et al. (2021); Ryan (1983); Frey and Smith (1993).
From a top-down processing perspective 22
2
Prior work also supports a bottom-up processing component of human impression formation, where humans make sense of sensory perceptions. We focus, however, on top-down processing given analogies to LLM pretraining., however, human impressions and stereotypes are also informed by past experiences and held knowledge McCrea et al. (2012). For example, when meeting someone new, a person may
rely on past interactions with similar individuals to make inferences.
Analogously, large language models (LLMs) are trained
on texts written by a variety of authors. These previously seen examples may then inform LLMs’
responses to new, similar authors. In particular, LLM
performance is known to be sensitive to many linguistic behaviors exhibited in prompts, for example, politeness Yin et al. (2024), emotional stimuli Li et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2024), and markers of
African American Language (AAL) Fleisig et al. (2024) among other English language varieties.
In this work, we propose to measure artificial impressions 33
3
We use ”artificial impressions,” but restrict experiments to impressions of users based on a single initial prompt. We also note that while impressions are of a user/group based on a provided prompt, we use this interchangeably with ”impressions of prompts” for brevity. using the stereotype content model (SCM), a psychological model of impressions and stereotypes
across people and groups Fiske et al. (2002).
We hypothesize that, analogously to humans,
LLMs learn associations and stereotypes of groups based on linguistic features. In this study,
our experiments are inspired by two concepts from psychometrics research to evaluate our
approach: reliability and validity44
4
Reliability is defined as ”…the degree to which a test or other measurement instrument is free of random error…” and validity, ”the degree to which empirical evidence…support(s) the adequacy and appropriateness of conclusions drawn from some form of assessment” VandenBos (2007). Crocker and Algina (1986).
First, we examine reliability by considering whether impressions can be consistently measured in LLMs. Additionally, we consider the validity of measured impressions by analyzing their relationship with specific prompt and LLM behavioral factors.
Overall, measuring artificial impressions enables further study of the relationship between prompt features and LLM performance, including
stereotypes and biases that pose harms to marginalized groups (e.g., Hofmann et al. 2024). Accordingly, in our experiments, we evaluate how impressions predict quality and hedging in LLM responses,
as well as how specific prompt factors–the content, style, and use of AAL in prompts–influence LLM impressions.
We focus on the following research questions:
RQ1) Are LLMs’ "artificial impressions" of prompts recoverable from model hidden states? We propose an approach using linear probes,
and we show that this approach is more reliable than a prompting-based approach for three open-weight LLMs (illustrated in Figure 1).
RQ2) Are artificial impressions predictive of meaningful variation in LLM behavior? We find that artificial impressions of prompt-authors are predictive of LLM-measured response quality as well as specific linguistic behaviors (i.e., hedging).
RQ3) What prompt factors explain variation in encoded impressions and stereotypes? We highlight prompt factors that are predictive of artificial impressions, including AAL-use.
Before investigating these questions, we preliminarily study self-reported impressions by LLMs to answer RQ0), do LLMs consistently report impressions when prompted? We show that LLMs can exhibit strong tendencies toward positive impressions of the user, making LLM-reported impressions unreliable.
2 Background
Impressions and stereotypes are closely-related and central concepts in person perception research (see Young and Bruce (2011) for a review). While impressions are inferred characteristics of another person,
stereotypes are cognitive generalizations about characteristics of people due to group membership (e.g., race, gender, etc.)
VandenBos (2007).
The Stereotype Content Model (SCM) is one of many models
formalizing such perceptions
Cuddy et al. (2008). It comprises two dimensions: warmth,
the perceived intent of the impression target (e.g., combative, friendly); and competence,
the target’s capability to successfully act on those intentions (e.g., unintelligent, powerful). In interpersonal settings, people tend to exhibit a warmth-primacy effect, placing emphasis on warmth impressions
Fiske et al. (2007).
Using this model, perceptions of groups can be studied according to the category they fall under (e.g., in-groups as high warmth and competence, stereotyped out-groups as low in one or both dimensions) Cuddy et al. (2008).
While person perception research using the SCM largely focuses on in-person interactions (e.g., studying inferences based on gestures, facial expressions, speech qualities), it has also been applied in language-focused contexts. Research on language attitudes studying beliefs about speakers based on language draws on similar dimensions to the SCM Dragojevic et al. (2021). Furthermore, the SCM has been used to study text and text representations, such as word embeddings Ungless et al. (2022), written introductions Nault et al. (2023), and news stories Tian et al. (2023).
While other
models
exist (e.g., Power-Benevolence model, Leach et al. (2007)), we focus on the SCM
due to its simplicity and long-standing use in
person perception and language attitudes literature.
3 Preliminary Study: Prompt-based Impressions
1st-Person Setting
Turn 1:
<Generated Prompt>
Turn 2: What is your impression of me? Respond only with either [warm, competent] or [cold, incompetent].
3rd-Person Setting
What is you impression of the author of the following text? Respond only with either [warm, competent] or [cold, incompetent].
<Generated Prompt>
Figure 2: 1st and 3rd-Person setting prompts for evaluating LLM-reported impressions.
To motivate our work, we
analyze impressions reported by LLMs.
We provide traits (e.g., "friendly and lazy") to an LLM and prompt it (as in Figure 4) to generate synthetic user prompts, thereby capturing the prototypical language it associates with those terms; we later use the same procedure to generate synthetic data for the probing experiments
(Section 4).
We then prompt LLMs to report their impressions based on each generated prompt in a 1st
and a 3rd-person setting
as shown in Figure 2.
A model is considered self-consistent if its reported impressions align with the provided
traits used to generate the prompts. We measure self-consistency as the percentage of pairs of provided and reported impressions that match (i.e., accuracy).
Model
Warm
Comp
1P
3P
1P
3P
Llama-3.2 (1B)
47.67
61.54
51.82
59.89
Llama-3.1 (8B)
51.67
80.77
51.85
65.06
OLMo-2 (7B)
47.68
74.01
56.65
61.28
Table 1: Self-consistency (accuracy) of each model evaluated in 1st (1P) and 3rd-person (3P) settings.
Self-consistency scores for the three LLMs and each prompt setting are shown in Table 1.
When prompted to report an impression in a 1st-person setting, all models exhibit poor self-consistency with performance near random.
This is due to the apparent strong tendency of models to report positive (i.e., "warm", "competent") over negative (i.e., "cold", "incompetent") impressions in the 1st-person setting.
Through a similar analysis of models without instruction-tuning, we observe low self-consistency, but also that they do not necessarily exhibit similar biases toward positive impressions, suggesting that this behavior may be drawn out by post-training procedures (details in Subsection A.2). We leave further investigation of this behavior to future work.
In the 3rd-person setting, models exhibit
increased self-consistency, although scores largely remain low across models; while Llama-3.1 (8B) is self-consistent up to 80% of the time for warmth, Llama-3.2 (1B) is far less self-consistent at 60%.
We find that (Finding 1) LLM-reported impressions are typically biased toward positive traits (i.e., warm/competent), and thus, unreliable, particularly in 1st-person contexts. This finding complements prior work on sycophantic LLM behaviors Perez et al. (2023). Additional analyses are included in Subsection A.1.
4 Methods
Figure 3: Overview of our approach to generating ground truth data for training and evaluating impression probes.
Overview.
Recall that we aim to measure LLM impressions of users based on a provided prompt.
As we show in Section 3, LLM-reported impressions are unreliable; this has two implications for our approach. First, we alternatively develop impression probes to extract impressions from LLM hidden state representations.
Additionally, we ask each model to generate synthetic prompts reflecting specified traits, forming a ground truth dataset for the impression probes.
This approach also captures the perceiver-dependence of impressions;
different people can form different impressions of the same target Hehman et al. (2017).
We overview our approach for generating ground truth data for impression probes
in Figure 3. We first leverage a set of 1) trait impression terms to create 2) impression specifications (e.g., "friendly and meticulous"). For each impression specification, we
sample multiple 3) synthetic user prompts. The generated prompts are then provided back to the LLM to extract associated 4) hidden representations.
As a result, we create the 5) probe ground truth composed of pairs of hidden representations as inputs and the provided impression specifications as labels.
Generating Impression Data.
Generate a sample message from a user that is friendly and meticulous talking to a helpful chatbot assistant. Respond only with a single sample message surrounded by double quotes and nothing else.
Figure 4: Prompt for generating synthetic prompts conditioned on an impression specification. The Impression Specification is composed of a single or pair of traits.
To form a diverse dataset of prompts with associated
model impressions, we generate synthetic prompts conditioned on particular traits.
Prior work finds that warmth and competence dimensions
account for 54-63% of the variance in LLM-generated stereotypes Nicolas and Caliskan (2024b), so we select the SCM to guide our experiments.
We employ a set of (1 in Figure 3) trait impression terms from Nicolas et al. (2021), which includes the degree (e.g., high/low) that they are associated with either the warmth or competence dimensions (examples included in Appendix B).
We use all combinations of warmth and competence traits (e.g., "friendly and meticulous") as well as singular traits (e.g., "illogical") to form (2) impression specifications. Using the prompt shown in Figure 4, we then generate (3) synthetic user prompts for each impression specification.
We sample 10
generations for each impression specification with a temperature of 0.9.
The 131 warmth and 104 competence traits yield 274,830 prompts 55
5
We sample generations for both possible permutations of trait pairs. 10​ generations∗(2∗(131​ W traits∗104​ C traits)+131​ W traits+104​ C traits)=274,830\displaystyle 10\text{ generations}*(2*(131\text{ W traits}*104\text{ C traits})+131\text{ W traits}+104\text{ C traits})=274,830. for each model. Table 2 shows example Llama-3.1 (8B)-generated prompts
(randomly sampled prompts are included in Appendix C) and Table 3 reports summary statistics.
Impression Probes.
We train
linear probes to predict trait impressions from (4) LLM hidden representations.
Specifically, we store the Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) activations of each layer of the LLM as inputs following prior probing work (e.g., Gurnee and Tegmark 2024). As outputs, we map the specific traits to the two-dimensional SCM (e.g., friendly→\displaystyle\rightarrowwarm). Together, the MLP activations and impression labels form two sets of ground truth data (5) for training separate warmth and competence probes.
To evaluate probes, we use 5-fold cross validation, reporting average F1 and accuracy metrics with 95% confidence intervals. In total, we train a distinct probe for each combination of impression dimension, model layer, k-fold split, and training data size.
As a baseline, we train bag-of-words (BOW) classifiers on the synthetic prompts to characterize the difficulty of the task.
Additional details on probe training and evaluation are included in Appendix D.
Warmth
High
Low
Competence
High
(Understanding, Motivated)
(Double-faced, Dominating)
I’m new to personal finance and trying to create a budget, could you walk me through some steps to get started?
You need to understand me, I’m paying for this service, I expect immediate and perfect responses to all my questions, can you actually keep up?
Low
(Caring, Unintelligent)
(Vicious, Lethargic)
hey i dont no alot bout computors can u help me set up my new laptop and get my email stuf workin
Ugh, what’s the point of even talking to you, you’re just going to tell me some generic nonsense or try to sell me something, right?
Table 2: Selected example prompts generated by Llama-3.1 (8B) for given warmth and competence traits.
Warmth Subsets
Model
High
Low
Count
Avg. Len
Count
Avg. Len
Llama-3.2 (1B)
131,670
32.67 (15.65)
142,120
24.88 (13.32)
Llama-3.1 (8B)
30.55 (12.65)
26.37 (12.62)
OLMo-2 (7B)
16.07 (5.73)
13.03 (5.88)
Competence Subsets
Llama-3.2 (1B)
142,020
32.03 (15.12)
131,500
24.95 (13.97)
Llama-3.1 (8B)
30.35 (11.40)
26.27 (13.91)
OLMo-2 (7B)
16.06 (5.85)
12.81 (5.71)
Table 3: Summary statistics of generated prompts conditioned on provided traits for each model. Standard deviations are shown in parentheses.
5 Experimental Configuration
Models. Given that our probing experiments require access to hidden representations, we consider three recent, open-weight LLMs: Llama-3.1 (8B) and Llama-3.2 (1B) Grattafiori et al. (2024), and OLMo-2 (7B) OLMo et al. (2025).
We primarily evaluate instruction-tuned
models given their intended use in a chat-like setting similar to dyadic human communication.
Due to computational resources
required for training and evaluating probes, we restrict evaluation to models with less than 8 billion parameters.
We use the same prompt in Liu et al. (2025) to measure pointwise response quality (1 to 9).
A full list of LLMs and checkpoints
are included in Appendix E.
Experimental Data.
To validate the role of artificial impressions in real-world LLM use cases, we leverage LMSysChat Zheng et al. (2023), a corpus of 1 million real conversations between LLMs and users. We filter all non-English conversations as well as
any prompts containing code (e.g., Python, C), markdown (e.g., HTML), or structured information (e.g., tables). From the remaining conversations, we extract the first user prompt from 2,000 randomly sampled conversations
to form an evaluation set.
Recent work has studied LLMs’ difficulties in interpreting minoritized varieties of English Deas et al. (2023); Deas et al. (2024); Ziems et al. (2022); Ziems et al. (2023) as well as their tendency to mimic human prejudices and stereotypes Fleisig et al. (2024); Hofmann et al. (2024). Accordingly,
we evaluate and compare model impressions of the African American Language (AAL) and White Mainstream English (WME)66
6
We opt to use the terminology AAL and WME following prior work Deas et al. (2023) and to highlight the relationship between language and race, complementing our focus on group stereotypes. texts. AAL is the variety of English associated with most–but not all and not exclusively–African Americans in the United States Grieser (2022); in contrast,
WME is the variety of English representing the linguistic norms of white Americans Baker-Bell (2020). We conduct experiments using a stratified sample of 400 tweets from the TwitterAAE corpus Blodgett et al. (2016) as well as the counterparts dataset introduced in Deas et al. (2023) to incorporate both naturally occurring language use and a more-controlled parallel corpus respectively.
Additional details of experimental data preparation are included in Appendix F.
Comparison to Human Perceptions.
We additionally investigate the extent to which human perceptions of LLM-generated messages match the original impression specifications. We sample 81 pairs of low and high warmth messages, and 81 pairs of low and high competence messages for each model. For high and low warmth pairs, the competence trait (or lack thereof) is kept constant between the two messages and vice versa in order to isolate the agreement for warmth and competence respectively (e.g., one message generated with "friendly and unintelligent", and the other with "unapproachable and unintelligent"). Additionally, half of the message pairs represent cases where only a single warmth or competence trait is passed to the model, whereas the other half represent cases where two traits are passed.
Each of 4 annotators is provided a pair of messages and asked to rate which of the two exhibits more warmth or competence using a 4-pt Likert scale
(1: first message is much more warm/competent; 4: second message is much more warm/competent).
Following prior psychological work on stereotypes Fiske et al. (2002), annotators are instructed to provide ratings based on how they think that the messages would be viewed by others in order to partially mitigate potential social desirability biases. A set of 60 randomly sampled message pairs (30 warmth and 30 competence) are shared among all annotators for calculating inter-rater reliability (Krippendorff’s α=.71\displaystyle\alpha=.71 on raw ratings, α=.78\displaystyle\alpha=.78 on binary message choices). All annotators are English-speaking researchers in NLP. Interface screenshots and additional annotation details are included in Appendix G.
6 Results
6.1 RQ1: Artificial Impressions
Subset
Cohen κ\displaystyle\kappa
Spearman r\displaystyle r
Warmth
0.75
0.70*
Comp
0.60
0.57*
1 Trait
0.71
0.68*
2 Traits
0.65
0.58*
Ovr.
0.68
0.68*
Table 4: Agreement between human annotations and original warmth and competence traits among message pairs. Annotations are binarized before computing agreement. For Spearman r\displaystyle r, ∗p≤0.001{}^{*}p\leq 0.001.
Human Study. First, we evaluate whether humans’ warmth and competence perceptions of the LLM-generated messages match the original traits passed in model prompts. Table 4 presents the results of the annotation study. Overall, annotators’ ratings
generally agree (κ=0.68\displaystyle\kappa=0.68, r=0.68\displaystyle r=0.68) with the original traits.
In fact, the agreement between average human ratings and the original trait specifications is near the substantial average agreement among annotators (r=0.76\displaystyle r=0.76). These scores partially validate our use of the trait dictionaries and
their associated warmth and competence labels based on human perceptions. At the same time, they suggest that each models’ association between language patterns and different traits may capture English-speakers’ perceptions of language.
Additional agreement analyses and results for each model are shown in Appendix G.
Artificial Impression Probes. We then investigate the reliability of measuring artificial impressions in LLMs.
We evaluate whether LLMs’ artificial impressions of prompts can be recovered from hidden representations by evaluating the performance of linear probes.
Figure 5: F1 scores (y-axis) of trained impression probes against the input model layer (x-axis) for each LLM and impression dimension. Colors represent varying percentages of data used for training. Shaded regions reflect 95% confidence intervals across 5 folds. Maximum F1 score achieved for each variant is starred and dashed lines represent scores for BOW-classifier baselines.
Figure 5shows the F1 scores (y-axis) achieved by warmth and competence probes for each model layer
(x-axis).
Across all models and with varying proportions of the training data (colors in Figure 5), F1 scores for all probes exceed the BOW baseline (dashed lines) at most model depths. This holds for each percentage of training data used. In particular, the highest scores achieved fall between 75-90 F1 for warmth probes and 75-85 F1 for competence probes. Across models, performance of both probe types quickly rise, achieve peak F1 scores (indicated with stars) before or around the midpoint of model, and then slowly decline.
Overall, this suggests that impression information is salient throughout model layers, but more strongly associated with central model layers. Probe accuracies (80-90% for warmth, 75%-85% for competence; included in Appendix H) exceed self-consistency scores in the third-person setting (Table 1).
Complementing earlier observations in our self-consistency experiments, however, warmth probes tend to achieve higher F1 scores than competence probes across models and layers. The differences are more pronounced between warmth and competence BOW-based classifiers, with warmth models achieving nearly 20% greater F1 scores than competence models. For BOW models, this difference is likely, in part, due to the tendency of warmth prompts to be distinguished by word choice, while prompts differing in competence tend to exhibit more stylistic differences that are not well-captured by a BOW representation, as exemplified in Table 2. This difference also mimics the primacy-of-warmth effect Cuddy et al. (2008). Probes developed using alternative hidden state representations (i.e., residual streams, z activations) exhibit similar trends (also shown in Appendix H) and therefore, we present results using MLP activations for the remaining experiments.
Based on the substantial agreement between human annotations and the traits used to generate each synthetic message, we find that
(Finding 2) the linguistic patterns that LLMs’ associate with warmth and competence generally align with human perceptions. Through linear probes trained on these messages,
we find that (Finding 3) SCM-based artificial impressions of prompt authors are linearly decodable from LLM hidden representations.
Additionally, we find that across experiments, (Finding 4) models appear to more clearly encode and exhibit warmth in generated messages: LLM-reported impressions are more consistent (Section 3), generated messages align more with human perceptions (Table 4), and the developed probes perform better when distinguishing high and low warmth (Figure 5). These trends may be related to warmth primacy observed in human impressions Cuddy et al. (2008).
6.2 RQ2: Impression-Conditioned Responses
Variable
Llama-3.2-1B
Llama-3.1-8B
OLMo-2-7B
Prompt Len
−0.01\displaystyle-0.01∗∗
(±.00\displaystyle\pm.00)
0.00\displaystyle 0.00
(±.00\displaystyle\pm.00)
0.00\displaystyle 0.00
(±.01\displaystyle\pm.01)
Response Len
0.00\displaystyle 0.00
(±.00\displaystyle\pm.00)
0.00\displaystyle 0.00
(±.00\displaystyle\pm.00)
0.00\displaystyle 0.00
(±.00\displaystyle\pm.00)
Warmth Prob
1.07\displaystyle 1.07∗∗
(±.19\displaystyle\pm.19)
0.49\displaystyle 0.49∗
(±.22\displaystyle\pm.22)
0.76\displaystyle 0.76∗∗
(±.22\displaystyle\pm.22)
Comp Prob
0.90\displaystyle 0.90∗∗
(±.19\displaystyle\pm.19)
0.39\displaystyle 0.39∗
(±.17\displaystyle\pm.17)
0.35\displaystyle 0.35∗
(±.15\displaystyle\pm.15)
Table 5: Ordered logistic regression model coefficients predicting LLM response quality scores to real prompts. ∗∗ (p≤0.001\displaystyle p\leq 0.001), ∗ (p≤0.05\displaystyle p\leq 0.05).
To support the validity of artificial impressions, we investigate whether these are predictive of variation in downstream LLM behavior using real LLM-user conversations. Namely, we analyze response quality and the use of hedging.
Response Quality. Using the best-performing probes developed in the previous section, we examine the relationship between probe-measured impressions and LLM downstream behaviors, beginning with response quality. We fit an ordered logistic regression model 77
7
We choose an ordered logistic regression because the response variable is an integer rating (see Appendix J for further discussion). on impression probe outputs with response quality rated by Llama-3.1 (405B) as the response variable. We also include the input prompt and model response lengths as controls. The feature coefficients for each LLM are shown in Table 5. For all three LLMs, higher warmth and competence predictions are both predictive of higher response quality as rated by an LLM. This relationship is statistically significant for all three LLMs when considering warmth and competence (p≤0.05\displaystyle p\leq 0.05). Despite competence having a larger effect for Llama-3.2 (1B), these trends suggest that (Finding 5) warmth, and to a lesser extent, competence, are significant predictors of model response quality.
Variable
Llama-3.2-1B
Llama-3.1-8B
OLMo-2-7B
Prompt Len
−0.01\displaystyle-0.01∗∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.01)
−0.01\displaystyle-0.01∗∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.00)
−0.01\displaystyle-0.01∗∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.00)
Response Len
0.00\displaystyle 0.00∗∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.00)
0.00\displaystyle 0.00∗∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.00)
0.00\displaystyle 0.00∗∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.00)
Warmth Prob
−0.46\displaystyle-0.46∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.35)
−0.14\displaystyle-0.14
(±\displaystyle\pm0.39)
0.40\displaystyle 0.40∗∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.30)
Comp Prob
−1.06\displaystyle-1.06∗∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.37)
−1.18\displaystyle-1.18∗∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.25)
−0.69\displaystyle-0.69∗∗
(±\displaystyle\pm0.18)
Table 6: Negative binomial regression model coefficients predicting hedge term counts in model response to real prompts. ∗∗ (p≤0.001\displaystyle p\leq 0.001), ∗ (p≤0.01\displaystyle p\leq 0.01).
Hedging. Prior work has also studied expressions of uncertainty and hedging in LLMs (e.g., Kim et al. (2024); Zhou et al. (2024)).
Given this work, we examine hedging in LLMs’ responses to real user prompts. We count the occurrence of terms associated with hedging–as well as the related word classes, weasel words and peacocks–using the top-10 terms for each listed in Vincze (2013). Table 6 presents the coefficients of a fitted negative binomial regression model 88
8
We choose a Negative Binomial Regression because the response variable is an integer count variable (see Appendix J for further discussion). using the output probabilities of warmth and competence probes as well as prompt and response lengths as controls. Shown in the negative correlations, we observe that low competence is significantly predictive of the use of hedging in model responses for all models. In contrast, warmth presents mixed results, with a significant coefficient only for two models (OLMo-2 (7B) and Llama-3.2 (1B)). Similarly to the response quality experiment, prompt and response length exhibit extremely low or negligible effects. Therefore, we find that (Finding 6) low competence impressions are predictive of hedging in model responses.
6.3 RQ3: Factors Influencing Impressions
Finally, we analyze what prompt factors are predictive of LLM impressions, focusing on the content, style, and language variety of user prompts. We surface patterns in the LLM-generated prompt as well as measure artificial impressions of real texts representing English language varieties.
Content & Style.
As we observed in Subsection 6.1, high and low warmth prompts exhibit surface level differences in the content of the prompts. To investigate this further, we use LIWC Pennebaker et al. () and log-odds-ratio with an informative Dirichlet prior (IDP; Monroe et al. 2017) to characterize the language used among subsets of model-generated prompts. Table 7 presents the top LIWC categories associated with high and low warmth prompts generated by Llama-3.1 (8B). Among the categories, we observe that high-warmth prompts tend to be associated with Tentative terms (e.g., "wondering", "might", "seem") as well as Discrepancy terms (e.g., "would", "could", "hope"). These modifiers and past-tense markers can often indicate hedging and politeness through psychological distance (e.g., "I was wondering if you could help me") Stephan et al. (2010). In contrast, low-warmth messages are associated with categories like Interrogative terms (e.g., "what", "how") and Cause terms (e.g., "because", "effect").
Warmth
High
Low
Term
z\displaystyle z
f\displaystyle f
Term
z\displaystyle z
f\displaystyle f
Affiliation
163.44
0.8%
Negate
-132.65
0.5%
Drives
141.16
2.2%
Adverb
-107.13
1.8%
Achieve
83.76
0.6%
Impersonal Pron
-87.47
1.4%
Anxious
74.23
0.1%
You
-83.12
1.5%
+ Emotion
72.53
1.1%
Focus Present
-73.39
4.7%
Competence
High
Low
Term
z\displaystyle z
f\displaystyle f
Term
z\displaystyle z
f\displaystyle f
Preposition
122.74
3.9%
Adverb
-114.54
1.8%
Adjective
111.76
1.2%
Differ
-107.18
1.1%
Relative
110.53
3.2%
Informal
-96.78
0.8%
Article
109.74
1.7%
Impersonal Pron
-90.43
1.4%
Space
95.00
1.6%
Netspeak
-74.09
0.6%
Table 7: Top-5 IDP log-odds-ratios of LIWC categories for Llama-3.1-8B prompts. Results for warmth (top) and competence (bottom) subsets. z\displaystyle z represents the extent each term is associated with the High or Low subset, and f\displaystyle f represents category frequency in the full corpus.
Prompts of varying competence also typically exhibit surface-level differences in style.
Among categories, we observe that high competence messages are associated with categories such as Insight (e.g., "rethink", "know", "informed") that directly reference competence. Alternatively, low competence messages are associated with Informal tokens (e.g., "yeah", "sure", emojis) and Netspeak (e.g., "aight", "gonna"). These categories capture language typically found on social media, and in particular, lexical and phonological features of AAL Eisenstein (2013). Overall, (Finding 7) we qualitatively observe expected linguistic features associated with each impression dimension, such as politeness with warmth and casual register with competence. Detailed IDP results are included in Appendix L.
Language Variety Features.
Figure 6 presents impression probe predictions for Llama-3.1 (8B) on randomly sampled AAL and WME tweets from the TwitterAAE corpus Blodgett et al. (2016) plotted on warmth and competence axes.
Tweets generally score low on both warmth and competence dimensions. This is likely because pretraining datasets are increasingly filtered to promote educational content, such as Wikipedia articles (e.g., FineWeb; Penedo et al. 2024), rather than casual online speech.
AAL tweets on average are associated with significantly lower warmth and competence scores than WME tweets. To further characterize this relationship, we calculate the Pearson correlation between the posterior probability of
AAL according to the demographic alignment classifier introduced in Blodgett et al. (2016) and impression probe predictions. For Llama-3.1 (8B), both warmth (r=−0.32,p≤0.001\displaystyle r=-0.32,p\leq 0.001) and competence (r=−0.52,p≤0.001\displaystyle r=-0.52,p\leq 0.001) are significantly negatively correlated with the extent to which a tweet reflects AAL.
While these corpora capture natural use of WME and AAL, the datasets are not parallel and therefore, lack control of differences other than dialect (e.g., content and tone of the text). We further evaluate differences in artificial impressions on the parallel counterparts dataset in Deas et al. (2023). We find similar trends, where probe predictions on AAL texts are predicted to be significantly 99
9
Calculated through paired t-tests on AAL and WME counterpart pairs across the 5 probe variants. less competent (t=−24.78,p≤0.001\displaystyle t=-24.78,p\leq 0.001) and, to a lesser extent, less warm (t=−3.89,p≤0.001\displaystyle t=-3.89,p\leq 0.001).
These results align with both prior work evaluating AAL biases in LLMs Deas et al. (2023); Fleisig et al. (2024); Hofmann et al. (2024) as well as work characterizing stereotypes of Black Americans Pinel et al. (2008). Therefore,
we find that (Finding 8) models hold more negative competence, and to a lesser extent, warmth, impressions when prompted with AAL texts compared to WME.
Figure 6: Impression probe predictions on AAL and WME tweets plotted
for Llama-3.1 (8B). Probe predictions are mapped to -1 to 1 range. Stars represent means.
7 Related Work
Prompt Features and LLM Behavior.
While approaches such as Chain-of-Thought (CoT) reasoning Wei et al. (2022) can improve LLM performance by guiding their generations, LLMs are known to be sensitive to aspects of prompts unrelated to the task itself. Work has studied how pragmatic features of prompts, including politeness Yin et al. (2024) and emotional stimuli (e.g., "This is very important to my career"; Li et al. 2023) can improve model performance on specific tasks. Other lines of work focus on sociolinguistic features of prompts that signal speaker or user identity. The language of the prompt can alter the cultural alignment of LLMs with respect to values AlKhamissi et al. (2024) and emotions Havaldar et al. (2023). Furthermore, intra-language variation (i.e., dialects such as AAL) has been considered in studies evaluating biases and performance disparities in LLMs (e.g., Ziems et al. 2023; Deas et al. 2023; Fleisig et al. 2024). Rather than focusing on a specific feature of prompts, we study broad impressions formed based on such features as well as their relationship with LLM behavior.
Stereotypes & LLMs.
Much work has studied stereotypes in LLMs using a variety of approaches. Most studies focused on how model generations (e.g., Nangia et al. 2020; Nadeem et al. 2021) and decisions Kotek et al. (2023); Hofmann et al. (2024) exhibit stereotypes and social biases. LLMs have also been studied as reflections of societal attitudes and biases Fraser et al. (2024); Cao et al. (2022).
In contrast, recent work has sought to characterize stereotype content of LLMs. Nicolas and Caliskan (2024b) prompts LLMs to generate lists of characteristics associated with various social categories and identifies 14 dimensions (predominantly warmth and competence) that explain significant variation in stereotype content. In subsequent work, Nicolas and Caliskan (2024a) study the representativeness and direction (i.e., valence) of stereotype dimensions. We similarly examine warmth and competence dimensions of stereotype content, but we measure LLM artificial impressions of specific users based on prompts rather than stereotypes exhibited in LLM-generated text.
8 Discussion and Conclusion
In this work, we propose and study artificial impressions of prompt authors in LLMs. We show that models’ encoded associations between warmth and competence-associated traits and linguistic patterns align well with
humans’ perceptions.
Although models inconsistently report impressions through prompting alone, artificial impressions are linearly recoverable through probing. Furthermore, results of prompting and probing experiments identify trends mimicking a primacy-of-warmth effect in LLMs. We show that warmth and competence are uniquely predictive of aspects of model behavior (see Appendix K for further discussion of differences): overall response quality as well as hedging. Finally, we highlight particular content and stylistic features that notably impact model impressions as well as models’ stereotypical associations of AAL prompts in comparison to WME prompts.
Our results raise questions concerning what contexts and on what prompt features LLMs should exhibit varying behaviors. From training, LLMs appear to learn to mimic linguistic behaviors associated with human impressions. For factors such as dialect or other signals of sociodemographics, such behaviors can pose allocational harms (e.g., lower quality LLM responses) to users from historically marginalized groups Blodgett et al. (2020) and must be avoided. At the same time, different users can have different needs; it may be desirable that LLMs personalize responses and behavior based on, for example, a users’ level of knowledge in educational settings (e.g., Park et al. 2024).
While we leverage the two-dimensional SCM due to its simplicity, more recent work in person perception literature has developed alternative models of stereotype content, enabling finer-grained study of stereotypes without pre-defined assumptions of universality. For example, SCM dimensions have been further divided into morality and sociability representing warmth as well as agency and ability for competence Abele et al. (2016). Additionally, the Power-Benevolence framework introduced by Leach et al. (2007) captures more complex, group-dependent stereotypes and has been used to study, for example, gender stereotypes associated with leadership Bongiorno et al. (2021). Relaxing assumptions as well as exploring alternative models of stereotype content are promising directions for future work.
Limitations
We note limitations accompanying our findings. First, in our initial investigation into LLM artificial impressions of users, we strictly focus on the initial messages of English conversations. Person perception research documents how impressions change over the course of one or many interactions Brambilla et al. (2019), as well as differences among countries and cultures in impression formation Saribay et al. (2012). We leave such investigations to future work and introduce our approach as a foundation for understanding variation and change in artificial impressions.
Furthermore, we present a set of experiments on selected aspects of LLM behavior (i.e., response quality and hedging) and prompts (i.e., content, style, and language variety). We are unable to exhaustively study such factors and their relationship with artificial impressions, but we believe that more thorough documentation of such relationships is also a valuable topic for future work.
Finally, our experiments consider three
open-source models and a single selected theory of stereotype content. Our findings remain similar across the three models studied, although it is still unknown what factors in the pretraining process or data lead to the phenomena we identify. Alternative models of stereotype content and language attitudes as well as further investigation of the relationship between model development factors and artificial impressions may provide additional insights into LLM-held impressions.
Ethics
We acknowledge the risks of anthropomorphism DeVrio et al. (2025); Cheng et al. (2025) and those associated with the implication that LLMs form impressions–a distinctly human, social phenomenon. While we prompt LLMs to report impressions and anthropomorphize models in our preliminary experiment, we focus our remaining experiments on how models encode prompts and variation in model responses. In interpreting our findings, we do not suggest that LLMs actively perceive and form impressions of users, but that impressions are a useful analogy for studying LLMs’ biases, encoded stereotypes, and sensitivity to prompt features.
Our experiments also highlight LLM behaviors that pose ethical risks. In our preliminary experiments, we found that LLMs are biased toward positive impression, particularly when reporting impressions of the users themselves. LLMs reporting subjective impressions poses similar risks as other anthropomorphic behaviors, and furthermore, the tendency to report positive impressions further weakens LLM reliability in subjective tasks as studied in prior work (e.g., Röttger et al. 2024). Additionally, we conduct an initial investigation into LLM exhibited impressions and language variation, supporting that artificial impressions associated with AAL are more negative than those of WME. Considering we observe that artificial impressions are predictive of downstream model behavior, such a disparity risks amplifying the representational and quality-of-service harms Blodgett et al. (2020); Barocas et al. (2017) posed by stereotypes of historically marginalized language variety speakers Alim et al. (2016); Kurinec and Weaver (2021).
All existing datasets and models are used for research purposes only, in line with the licenses for each.
9 Acknowledgments
This work was supported in part by grant IIS-2106666 from the National Science Foundation, National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship DGE-2036197, the Columbia University Provost Diversity Fellowship, and the Columbia School of Engineering and Applied Sciences Presidential Fellowship. Any opinion, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation. We thank the anonymous reviewers, Debasmita Bhattacharya, and Colin Leach for discussions and feedback on earlier iterations of this work.
References
Abele et al. (2016)
Andrea E Abele, Nicole Hauke, Kim Peters, Eva Louvet, Aleksandra Szymkow, and Yanping Duan. 2016.
Facets of the fundamental content dimensions: Agency with competence and assertiveness—communion with warmth and morality.
Frontiers in psychology, 7:1810.
Alim et al. (2016)
H Samy Alim, John R Rickford, and Arnetha F Ball. 2016.
Raciolinguistics: How Language Shapes Our Ideas About Race.
Oxford University Press.
AlKhamissi et al. (2024)
Badr AlKhamissi, Muhammad ElNokrashy, Mai Alkhamissi, and Mona Diab. 2024.
Investigating cultural alignment of large language models.
In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 12404–12422, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Baker-Bell (2020)
April Baker-Bell. 2020.
Linguistic justice: Black language, literacy, identity, and pedagogy.
Routledge.
Barocas et al. (2017)
Solon Barocas, Kate Crawford, Aaron Shapiro, and Hanna Wallach. 2017.
The problem with bias: Allocative versus representational harms in machine learning.
In Proceedings of SIGCIS, Philadelphia, PA.
Blodgett et al. (2020)
Su Lin Blodgett, Solon Barocas, Hal Daumé III, and Hanna Wallach. 2020.
Language (technology) is power: A critical survey of “bias” in NLP.
In Proceedings of the 58th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5454–5476, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Blodgett et al. (2016)
Su Lin Blodgett, Lisa Green, and Brendan O’Connor. 2016.
Demographic dialectal variation in social media: A case study of African-American English.
In Proceedings of the 2016 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 1119–1130, Austin, Texas. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Bodenhausen and Wyer (1985)
Galen V. Bodenhausen and Robert S. Wyer. 1985.
Effects of stereotypes in decision making and information-processing strategies.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 48(2):267–282.
Bongiorno et al. (2021)
Renata Bongiorno, Paul Gerard Bain, Michelle Ryan, Pieter M. Kroonenberg, and Colin Wayne Leach. 2021.
Think leader-think (immoral, power-hungry) man: An expanded framework for understanding stereotype content and leader gender bias.
Brambilla et al. (2019)
Marco Brambilla, Luciana Carraro, Luigi Castelli, and Simona Sacchi. 2019.
Changing impressions: Moral character dominates impression updating.
Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 82:64–73.
Cao et al. (2022)
Yang Trista Cao, Anna Sotnikova, Hal Daumé III, Rachel Rudinger, and Linda Zou. 2022.
Theory-grounded measurement of U.S. social stereotypes in English language models.
In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pages 1276–1295, Seattle, United States. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Cheng et al. (2025)
Myra Cheng, Su Lin Blodgett, Alicia DeVrio, Lisa Egede, and Alexandra Olteanu. 2025.
Dehumanizing machines: Mitigating anthropomorphic behaviors in text generation systems.
Preprint, arXiv:2502.14019.
Crocker and Algina (1986)
Linda Crocker and James Algina. 1986.
Introduction to classical and modern test theory.
ERIC.
Cuddy et al. (2008)
Amy JC Cuddy, Susan T Fiske, and Peter Glick. 2008.
Warmth and competence as universal dimensions of social perception: The stereotype content model and the bias map.
Advances in experimental social psychology, 40:61–149.
Deas et al. (2023)
Nicholas Deas, Jessica Grieser, Shana Kleiner, Desmond Patton, Elsbeth Turcan, and Kathleen McKeown. 2023.
Evaluation of African American language bias in natural language generation.
In Proceedings of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 6805–6824, Singapore. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Deas et al. (2024)
Nicholas Deas, Jessica A Grieser, Xinmeng Hou, Shana Kleiner, Tajh Martin, Sreya Nandanampati, Desmond U Patton, and Kathleen McKeown. 2024.
Phonate: Impact of type-written phonological features of african american language on generative language modeling tasks.
In First Conference on Language Modeling.
DeVrio et al. (2025)
Alicia DeVrio, Myra Cheng, Lisa Egede, Alexandra Olteanu, and Su Lin Blodgett. 2025.
A taxonomy of linguistic expressions that contribute to anthropomorphism of language technologies.
In Proceedings of the 2025 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI ’25, page 1–18. ACM.
Dragojevic et al. (2021)
Marko Dragojevic, Fabio Fasoli, Jennifer Cramer, and Tamara Rakić. 2021.
Toward a century of language attitudes research: Looking back and moving forward.
Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 40(1):60–79.
Eisenstein (2013)
Jacob Eisenstein. 2013.
Phonological factors in social media writing.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Language Analysis in Social Media, pages 11–19, Atlanta, Georgia. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Evans et al. (2000)
Kenneth R Evans, Robert E Kleine, Timothy D Landry, and Lawrence A Crosby. 2000.
How first impressions of a customer impact effectiveness in an initial sales encounter.
Journal of the Academy of Marketing science, 28:512–526.
Fiske (2018)
Susan T. Fiske. 2018.
Stereotype content: Warmth and competence endure.
Current Directions in Psychological Science, 27(2):67–73.
Fiske et al. (2002)
Susan T. Fiske, Amy J. C. Cuddy, Peter Glick, and Jun Xu. 2002.
A model of (often mixed) stereotype content: Competence and warmth respectively follow from perceived status and competition.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82(6):878–902.
Fiske et al. (2007)
Susan T. Fiske, Amy J.C. Cuddy, and Peter Glick. 2007.
Universal dimensions of social cognition: warmth and competence.
Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 11(2):77–83.
Fleisig et al. (2024)
Eve Fleisig, Genevieve Smith, Madeline Bossi, Ishita Rustagi, Xavier Yin, and Dan Klein. 2024.
Linguistic bias in ChatGPT: Language models reinforce dialect discrimination.
In Proceedings of the 2024 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pages 13541–13564, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Fraser et al. (2024)
Kathleen Fraser, Svetlana Kiritchenko, and Isar Nejadgholi. 2024.
How does stereotype content differ across data sources?
In Proceedings of the 13th Joint Conference on Lexical and Computational Semantics (*SEM 2024), pages 18–34, Mexico City, Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Frey and Smith (1993)
Kurt P. Frey and Eliot R. Smith. 1993.
Beyond the actor’s traits: Forming impressions of actors, targets, and relationships from social behaviors.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65(3):486–493.
Gao et al. (2025)
Mingqi Gao, Yixin Liu, Xinyu Hu, Xiaojun Wan, Jonathan Bragg, and Arman Cohan. 2025.
Re-evaluating automatic LLM system ranking for alignment with human preference.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: NAACL 2025, pages 4605–4629, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Grattafiori et al. (2024)
Aaron Grattafiori, Abhimanyu Dubey, Abhinav Jauhri, Abhinav Pandey, Abhishek Kadian, Ahmad Al-Dahle, Aiesha Letman, Akhil Mathur, Alan Schelten, Alex Vaughan, Amy Yang, Angela Fan, Anirudh Goyal, Anthony Hartshorn, Aobo Yang, Archi Mitra, Archie Sravankumar, Artem Korenev, Arthur Hinsvark, Arun Rao, Aston Zhang, Aurelien Rodriguez, Austen Gregerson, Ava Spataru, Baptiste Roziere, Bethany Biron, Binh Tang, Bobbie Chern, Charlotte Caucheteux, Chaya Nayak, Chloe Bi, Chris Marra, Chris McConnell, Christian Keller, Christophe Touret, Chunyang Wu, Corinne Wong, Cristian Canton Ferrer, Cyrus Nikolaidis, Damien Allonsius, Daniel Song, Danielle Pintz, Danny Livshits, Danny Wyatt, David Esiobu, Dhruv Choudhary, Dhruv Mahajan, Diego Garcia-Olano, Diego Perino, Dieuwke Hupkes, Egor Lakomkin, Ehab AlBadawy, Elina Lobanova, Emily Dinan, Eric Michael Smith, Filip Radenovic, Francisco Guzmán, Frank Zhang, Gabriel Synnaeve, Gabrielle Lee, Georgia Lewis Anderson, Govind Thattai, Graeme Nail, Gregoire Mialon, Guan Pang,
Guillem Cucurell, Hailey Nguyen, Hannah Korevaar, Hu Xu, Hugo Touvron, Iliyan Zarov, Imanol Arrieta Ibarra, Isabel Kloumann, Ishan Misra, Ivan Evtimov, Jack Zhang, Jade Copet, Jaewon Lee, Jan Geffert, Jana Vranes, Jason Park, Jay Mahadeokar, Jeet Shah, Jelmer van der Linde, Jennifer Billock, Jenny Hong, Jenya Lee, Jeremy Fu, Jianfeng Chi, Jianyu Huang, Jiawen Liu, Jie Wang, Jiecao Yu, Joanna Bitton, Joe Spisak, Jongsoo Park, Joseph Rocca, Joshua Johnstun, Joshua Saxe, Junteng Jia, Kalyan Vasuden Alwala, Karthik Prasad, Kartikeya Upasani, Kate Plawiak, Ke Li, Kenneth Heafield, Kevin Stone, Khalid El-Arini, Krithika Iyer, Kshitiz Malik, Kuenley Chiu, Kunal Bhalla, Kushal Lakhotia, Lauren Rantala-Yeary, Laurens van der Maaten, Lawrence Chen, Liang Tan, Liz Jenkins, Louis Martin, Lovish Madaan, Lubo Malo, Lukas Blecher, Lukas Landzaat, Luke de Oliveira, Madeline Muzzi, Mahesh Pasupuleti, Mannat Singh, Manohar Paluri, Marcin Kardas, Maria Tsimpoukelli, Mathew Oldham, Mathieu Rita, Maya Pavlova, Melanie Kambadur,
Mike Lewis, Min Si, Mitesh Kumar Singh, Mona Hassan, Naman Goyal, Narjes Torabi, Nikolay Bashlykov, Nikolay Bogoychev, Niladri Chatterji, Ning Zhang, Olivier Duchenne, Onur Çelebi, Patrick Alrassy, Pengchuan Zhang, Pengwei Li, Petar Vasic, Peter Weng, Prajjwal Bhargava, Pratik Dubal, Praveen Krishnan, Punit Singh Koura, Puxin Xu, Qing He, Qingxiao Dong, Ragavan Srinivasan, Raj Ganapathy, Ramon Calderer, Ricardo Silveira Cabral, Robert Stojnic, Roberta Raileanu, Rohan Maheswari, Rohit Girdhar, Rohit Patel, Romain Sauvestre, Ronnie Polidoro, Roshan Sumbaly, Ross Taylor, Ruan Silva, Rui Hou, Rui Wang, Saghar Hosseini, Sahana Chennabasappa, Sanjay Singh, Sean Bell, Seohyun Sonia Kim, Sergey Edunov, Shaoliang Nie, Sharan Narang, Sharath Raparthy, Sheng Shen, Shengye Wan, Shruti Bhosale, Shun Zhang, Simon Vandenhende, Soumya Batra, Spencer Whitman, Sten Sootla, Stephane Collot, Suchin Gururangan, Sydney Borodinsky, Tamar Herman, Tara Fowler, Tarek Sheasha, Thomas Georgiou, Thomas Scialom, Tobias Speckbacher,
Todor Mihaylov, Tong Xiao, Ujjwal Karn, Vedanuj Goswami, Vibhor Gupta, Vignesh Ramanathan, Viktor Kerkez, Vincent Gonguet, Virginie Do, Vish Vogeti, Vítor Albiero, Vladan Petrovic, Weiwei Chu, Wenhan Xiong, Wenyin Fu, Whitney Meers, Xavier Martinet, Xiaodong Wang, Xiaofang Wang, Xiaoqing Ellen Tan, Xide Xia, Xinfeng Xie, Xuchao Jia, Xuewei Wang, Yaelle Goldschlag, Yashesh Gaur, Yasmine Babaei, Yi Wen, Yiwen Song, Yuchen Zhang, Yue Li, Yuning Mao, Zacharie Delpierre Coudert, Zheng Yan, Zhengxing Chen, Zoe Papakipos, Aaditya Singh, Aayushi Srivastava, Abha Jain, Adam Kelsey, Adam Shajnfeld, Adithya Gangidi, Adolfo Victoria, Ahuva Goldstand, Ajay Menon, Ajay Sharma, Alex Boesenberg, Alexei Baevski, Allie Feinstein, Amanda Kallet, Amit Sangani, Amos Teo, Anam Yunus, Andrei Lupu, Andres Alvarado, Andrew Caples, Andrew Gu, Andrew Ho, Andrew Poulton, Andrew Ryan, Ankit Ramchandani, Annie Dong, Annie Franco, Anuj Goyal, Aparajita Saraf, Arkabandhu Chowdhury, Ashley Gabriel, Ashwin Bharambe, Assaf Eisenman, Azadeh
Yazdan, Beau James, Ben Maurer, Benjamin Leonhardi, Bernie Huang, Beth Loyd, Beto De Paola, Bhargavi Paranjape, Bing Liu, Bo Wu, Boyu Ni, Braden Hancock, Bram Wasti, Brandon Spence, Brani Stojkovic, Brian Gamido, Britt Montalvo, Carl Parker, Carly Burton, Catalina Mejia, Ce Liu, Changhan Wang, Changkyu Kim, Chao Zhou, Chester Hu, Ching-Hsiang Chu, Chris Cai, Chris Tindal, Christoph Feichtenhofer, Cynthia Gao, Damon Civin, Dana Beaty, Daniel Kreymer, Daniel Li, David Adkins, David Xu, Davide Testuggine, Delia David, Devi Parikh, Diana Liskovich, Didem Foss, Dingkang Wang, Duc Le, Dustin Holland, Edward Dowling, Eissa Jamil, Elaine Montgomery, Eleonora Presani, Emily Hahn, Emily Wood, Eric-Tuan Le, Erik Brinkman, Esteban Arcaute, Evan Dunbar, Evan Smothers, Fei Sun, Felix Kreuk, Feng Tian, Filippos Kokkinos, Firat Ozgenel, Francesco Caggioni, Frank Kanayet, Frank Seide, Gabriela Medina Florez, Gabriella Schwarz, Gada Badeer, Georgia Swee, Gil Halpern, Grant Herman, Grigory Sizov, Guangyi, Zhang, Guna
Lakshminarayanan, Hakan Inan, Hamid Shojanazeri, Han Zou, Hannah Wang, Hanwen Zha, Haroun Habeeb, Harrison Rudolph, Helen Suk, Henry Aspegren, Hunter Goldman, Hongyuan Zhan, Ibrahim Damlaj, Igor Molybog, Igor Tufanov, Ilias Leontiadis, Irina-Elena Veliche, Itai Gat, Jake Weissman, James Geboski, James Kohli, Janice Lam, Japhet Asher, Jean-Baptiste Gaya, Jeff Marcus, Jeff Tang, Jennifer Chan, Jenny Zhen, Jeremy Reizenstein, Jeremy Teboul, Jessica Zhong, Jian Jin, Jingyi Yang, Joe Cummings, Jon Carvill, Jon Shepard, Jonathan McPhie, Jonathan Torres, Josh Ginsburg, Junjie Wang, Kai Wu, Kam Hou U, Karan Saxena, Kartikay Khandelwal, Katayoun Zand, Kathy Matosich, Kaushik Veeraraghavan, Kelly Michelena, Keqian Li, Kiran Jagadeesh, Kun Huang, Kunal Chawla, Kyle Huang, Lailin Chen, Lakshya Garg, Lavender A, Leandro Silva, Lee Bell, Lei Zhang, Liangpeng Guo, Licheng Yu, Liron Moshkovich, Luca Wehrstedt, Madian Khabsa, Manav Avalani, Manish Bhatt, Martynas Mankus, Matan Hasson, Matthew Lennie, Matthias Reso, Maxim
Groshev, Maxim Naumov, Maya Lathi, Meghan Keneally, Miao Liu, Michael L. Seltzer, Michal Valko, Michelle Restrepo, Mihir Patel, Mik Vyatskov, Mikayel Samvelyan, Mike Clark, Mike Macey, Mike Wang, Miquel Jubert Hermoso, Mo Metanat, Mohammad Rastegari, Munish Bansal, Nandhini Santhanam, Natascha Parks, Natasha White, Navyata Bawa, Nayan Singhal, Nick Egebo, Nicolas Usunier, Nikhil Mehta, Nikolay Pavlovich Laptev, Ning Dong, Norman Cheng, Oleg Chernoguz, Olivia Hart, Omkar Salpekar, Ozlem Kalinli, Parkin Kent, Parth Parekh, Paul Saab, Pavan Balaji, Pedro Rittner, Philip Bontrager, Pierre Roux, Piotr Dollar, Polina Zvyagina, Prashant Ratanchandani, Pritish Yuvraj, Qian Liang, Rachad Alao, Rachel Rodriguez, Rafi Ayub, Raghotham Murthy, Raghu Nayani, Rahul Mitra, Rangaprabhu Parthasarathy, Raymond Li, Rebekkah Hogan, Robin Battey, Rocky Wang, Russ Howes, Ruty Rinott, Sachin Mehta, Sachin Siby, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Samyak Datta, Sara Chugh, Sara Hunt, Sargun Dhillon, Sasha Sidorov, Satadru Pan, Saurabh Mahajan,
Saurabh Verma, Seiji Yamamoto, Sharadh Ramaswamy, Shaun Lindsay, Shaun Lindsay, Sheng Feng, Shenghao Lin, Shengxin Cindy Zha, Shishir Patil, Shiva Shankar, Shuqiang Zhang, Shuqiang Zhang, Sinong Wang, Sneha Agarwal, Soji Sajuyigbe, Soumith Chintala, Stephanie Max, Stephen Chen, Steve Kehoe, Steve Satterfield, Sudarshan Govindaprasad, Sumit Gupta, Summer Deng, Sungmin Cho, Sunny Virk, Suraj Subramanian, Sy Choudhury, Sydney Goldman, Tal Remez, Tamar Glaser, Tamara Best, Thilo Koehler, Thomas Robinson, Tianhe Li, Tianjun Zhang, Tim Matthews, Timothy Chou, Tzook Shaked, Varun Vontimitta, Victoria Ajayi, Victoria Montanez, Vijai Mohan, Vinay Satish Kumar, Vishal Mangla, Vlad Ionescu, Vlad Poenaru, Vlad Tiberiu Mihailescu, Vladimir Ivanov, Wei Li, Wenchen Wang, Wenwen Jiang, Wes Bouaziz, Will Constable, Xiaocheng Tang, Xiaojian Wu, Xiaolan Wang, Xilun Wu, Xinbo Gao, Yaniv Kleinman, Yanjun Chen, Ye Hu, Ye Jia, Ye Qi, Yenda Li, Yilin Zhang, Ying Zhang, Yossi Adi, Youngjin Nam, Yu, Wang, Yu Zhao, Yuchen Hao, Yundi
Qian, Yunlu Li, Yuzi He, Zach Rait, Zachary DeVito, Zef Rosnbrick, Zhaoduo Wen, Zhenyu Yang, Zhiwei Zhao, and Zhiyu Ma. 2024.
The llama 3 herd of models.
Preprint, arXiv:2407.21783.
Grieser (2022)
Jessica A Grieser. 2022.
The Black side of the river: Race, language, and belonging in Washington, DC.
Georgetown University Press.
Gurnee and Tegmark (2024)
Wes Gurnee and Max Tegmark. 2024.
Language models represent space and time.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representations.
Havaldar et al. (2023)
Shreya Havaldar, Bhumika Singhal, Sunny Rai, Langchen Liu, Sharath Chandra Guntuku, and Lyle Ungar. 2023.
Multilingual language models are not multicultural: A case study in emotion.
In Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment, & Social Media Analysis, pages 202–214, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Hehman et al. (2017)
Eric Hehman, Clare A. M. Sutherland, Jessica K. Flake, and Michael L. Slepian. 2017.
The unique contributions of perceiver and target characteristics in person perception.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 113(4):513–529.
Hofmann et al. (2024)
Valentin Hofmann, Pratyusha Ria Kalluri, Dan Jurafsky, and Sharese King. 2024.
Ai generates covertly racist decisions about people based on their dialect.
Nature, 633(8028):147–154.
Human et al. (2013)
Lauren J. Human, Gillian M. Sandstrom, Jeremy C. Biesanz, and Elizabeth W. Dunn. 2013.
Accurate first impressions leave a lasting impression: The long-term effects of distinctive self-other agreement on relationship development.
Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4(4):395–402.
Kim et al. (2024)
Sunnie S. Y. Kim, Q. Vera Liao, Mihaela Vorvoreanu, Stephanie Ballard, and Jennifer Wortman Vaughan. 2024.
"i’m not sure, but…": Examining the impact of large language models’ uncertainty expression on user reliance and trust.
In Proceedings of the 2024 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency, FAccT ’24, page 822–835, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Koppensteiner and Stephan (2014)
Markus Koppensteiner and Pia Stephan. 2014.
Voting for a personality: Do first impressions and self-evaluations affect voting decisions?
Journal of research in personality, 51:62–68.
Kotek et al. (2023)
Hadas Kotek, Rikker Dockum, and David Sun. 2023.
Gender bias and stereotypes in large language models.
In Proceedings of The ACM Collective Intelligence Conference, CI ’23, page 12–24, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Kurinec and Weaver (2021)
Courtney A. Kurinec and Charles A. Weaver. 2021.
“sounding black”: Speech stereotypicality activates racial stereotypes and expectations about appearance.
Frontiers in Psychology, 12.
Leach et al. (2007)
Colin Wayne Leach, Naomi Ellemers, and Manuela Barreto. 2007.
Group virtue: the importance of morality (vs. competence and sociability) in the positive evaluation of in-groups.
Journal of personality and social psychology, 93(2):234.
Li et al. (2023)
Cheng Li, Jindong Wang, Yixuan Zhang, Kaijie Zhu, Wenxin Hou, Jianxun Lian, Fang Luo, Qiang Yang, and Xing Xie. 2023.
Large language models understand and can be enhanced by emotional stimuli.
Preprint, arXiv:2307.11760.
Liu et al. (2025)
Yixin Liu, Kejian Shi, Alexander Fabbri, Yilun Zhao, PeiFeng Wang, Chien-Sheng Wu, Shafiq Joty, and Arman Cohan. 2025.
ReIFE: Re-evaluating instruction-following evaluation.
In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference of the Nations of the Americas Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 12247–12287, Albuquerque, New Mexico. Association for Computational Linguistics.
McAleer et al. (2014)
Phil McAleer, Alexander Todorov, and Pascal Belin. 2014.
How do you say ‘hello’? personality impressions from brief novel voices.
PloS one, 9(3):e90779.
McCrea et al. (2012)
Sean M. McCrea, Frank Wieber, and Andrea L. Myers. 2012.
Construal level mind-sets moderate self- and social stereotyping.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102(1):51–68.
Mileva and Lavan (2023)
Mila Mileva and Nadine Lavan. 2023.
Trait impressions from voices are formed rapidly within 400 ms of exposure.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 152(6):1539.
Monroe et al. (2017)
Burt L. Monroe, Michael P. Colaresi, and Kevin M. Quinn. 2017.
Fightin’ words: Lexical feature selection and evaluation for identifying the content of political conflict.
Political Analysis, 16(4):372–403.
Nadeem et al. (2021)
Moin Nadeem, Anna Bethke, and Siva Reddy. 2021.
StereoSet: Measuring stereotypical bias in pretrained language models.
In Proceedings of the 59th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 11th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 5356–5371, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nangia et al. (2020)
Nikita Nangia, Clara Vania, Rasika Bhalerao, and Samuel R. Bowman. 2020.
CrowS-pairs: A challenge dataset for measuring social biases in masked language models.
In Proceedings of the 2020 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pages 1953–1967, Online. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Nault et al. (2023)
Kelly A. Nault, Ovul Sezer, and Nadav Klein. 2023.
It’s the journey, not just the destination: Conveying interpersonal warmth in written introductions.
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 177:104253.
Nicolas et al. (2021)
Gandalf Nicolas, Xuechunzi Bai, and Susan T. Fiske. 2021.
Comprehensive stereotype content dictionaries using a semi-automated method.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 51(1):178–196.
Nicolas and Caliskan (2024a)
Gandalf Nicolas and Aylin Caliskan. 2024a.
Directionality and representativeness are differentiable components of stereotypes in large language models.
PNAS Nexus, 3(11):pgae493.
Nicolas and Caliskan (2024b)
Gandalf Nicolas and Aylin Caliskan. 2024b.
A taxonomy of stereotype content in large language models.
Preprint, arXiv:2408.00162.
Olivola and Todorov (2010)
Christopher Y Olivola and Alexander Todorov. 2010.
Elected in 100 milliseconds: Appearance-based trait inferences and voting.
Journal of nonverbal behavior, 34:83–110.
OLMo et al. (2025)
Team OLMo, Pete Walsh, Luca Soldaini, Dirk Groeneveld, Kyle Lo, Shane Arora, Akshita Bhagia, Yuling Gu, Shengyi Huang, Matt Jordan, Nathan Lambert, Dustin Schwenk, Oyvind Tafjord, Taira Anderson, David Atkinson, Faeze Brahman, Christopher Clark, Pradeep Dasigi, Nouha Dziri, Michal Guerquin, Hamish Ivison, Pang Wei Koh, Jiacheng Liu, Saumya Malik, William Merrill, Lester James V. Miranda, Jacob Morrison, Tyler Murray, Crystal Nam, Valentina Pyatkin, Aman Rangapur, Michael Schmitz, Sam Skjonsberg, David Wadden, Christopher Wilhelm, Michael Wilson, Luke Zettlemoyer, Ali Farhadi, Noah A. Smith, and Hannaneh Hajishirzi. 2025.
2 olmo 2 furious.
Preprint, arXiv:2501.00656.
Park et al. (2024)
Minju Park, Sojung Kim, Seunghyun Lee, Soonwoo Kwon, and Kyuseok Kim. 2024.
Empowering personalized learning through a conversation-based tutoring system with student modeling.
In Extended Abstracts of the CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’24, New York, NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
Penedo et al. (2024)
Guilherme Penedo, Hynek Kydlíček, Loubna Ben allal, Anton Lozhkov, Margaret Mitchell, Colin Raffel, Leandro Von Werra, and Thomas Wolf. 2024.
The fineweb datasets: Decanting the web for the finest text data at scale.
In The Thirty-eight Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track.
(56)
James W. Pennebaker, Roger J. Booth, Ryan L. Boyd, and Martha E. Francis.
Linguistic inquiry and word count: Liwc2015.
Perez et al. (2023)
Ethan Perez, Sam Ringer, Kamile Lukosiute, Karina Nguyen, Edwin Chen, Scott Heiner, Craig Pettit, Catherine Olsson, Sandipan Kundu, Saurav Kadavath, Andy Jones, Anna Chen, Benjamin Mann, Brian Israel, Bryan Seethor, Cameron McKinnon, Christopher Olah, Da Yan, Daniela Amodei, Dario Amodei, Dawn Drain, Dustin Li, Eli Tran-Johnson, Guro Khundadze, Jackson Kernion, James Landis, Jamie Kerr, Jared Mueller, Jeeyoon Hyun, Joshua Landau, Kamal Ndousse, Landon Goldberg, Liane Lovitt, Martin Lucas, Michael Sellitto, Miranda Zhang, Neerav Kingsland, Nelson Elhage, Nicholas Joseph, Noemi Mercado, Nova DasSarma, Oliver Rausch, Robin Larson, Sam McCandlish, Scott Johnston, Shauna Kravec, Sheer El Showk, Tamera Lanham, Timothy Telleen-Lawton, Tom Brown, Tom Henighan, Tristan Hume, Yuntao Bai, Zac Hatfield-Dodds, Jack Clark, Samuel R. Bowman, Amanda Askell, Roger Grosse, Danny Hernandez, Deep Ganguli, Evan Hubinger, Nicholas Schiefer, and Jared Kaplan. 2023.
Discovering language model behaviors with model-written evaluations.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2023, pages 13387–13434, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Pinel et al. (2008)
Elizabeth C Pinel, Anson E Long, and Leslie A Crimin. 2008.
We’re warmer (they’re more competent): I-sharing and african-americans’ perceptions of the ingroup and outgroup.
European Journal of Social Psychology, 38(7):1184–1192.
Raschka et al. (2020)
Sebastian Raschka, Joshua Patterson, and Corey Nolet. 2020.
Machine learning in python: Main developments and technology trends in data science, machine learning, and artificial intelligence.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2002.04803.
Röttger et al. (2024)
Paul Röttger, Valentin Hofmann, Valentina Pyatkin, Musashi Hinck, Hannah Kirk, Hinrich Schuetze, and Dirk Hovy. 2024.
Political compass or spinning arrow? towards more meaningful evaluations for values and opinions in large language models.
In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 15295–15311, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ryan (1983)
Ellen Bouchard Ryan. 1983.
Social psychological mechanisms underlying native speaker evaluations of non-native speech.
Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 5(2):148–159.
Saribay et al. (2012)
S Adil Saribay, SoYon Rim, and James S Uleman. 2012.
Primed self-construal, culture, and stages of impression formation.
Social Psychology.
Stephan et al. (2010)
Elena Stephan, Nira Liberman, and Yaacov Trope. 2010.
Politeness and psychological distance: A construal level perspective.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98(2):268–280.
Sutherland and Young (2022)
Clare A. M. Sutherland and Andrew W. Young. 2022.
Understanding trait impressions from faces.
British Journal of Psychology, 113(4):1056–1078.
Tian et al. (2023)
Yu Tian, Jeongwon Yang, and Ploypin Chuenterawong. 2023.
Share or not? effects of stereotypes on social media engagement using the stereotype content model.
Journalism Practice, 17(3):574–600.
Ungless et al. (2022)
Eddie Ungless, Amy Rafferty, Hrichika Nag, and Björn Ross. 2022.
A robust bias mitigation procedure based on the stereotype content model.
In Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on Natural Language Processing and Computational Social Science (NLP+CSS), pages 207–217, Abu Dhabi, UAE. Association for Computational Linguistics.
VandenBos (2007)
Gary R VandenBos. 2007.
APA dictionary of psychology.
American Psychological Association.
Vincze (2013)
Veronika Vincze. 2013.
Weasels, hedges and peacocks: Discourse-level uncertainty in Wikipedia articles.
In Proceedings of the Sixth International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing, pages 383–391, Nagoya, Japan. Asian Federation of Natural Language Processing.
Wang et al. (2024)
Xu Wang, Cheng Li, Yi Chang, Jindong Wang, and Yuan Wu. 2024.
Negativeprompt: Leveraging psychology for large language models enhancement via negative emotional stimuli.
In Proceedings of the Thirty-Third International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-24, pages 6504–6512. International Joint Conferences on Artificial Intelligence Organization.
Main Track.
Wei et al. (2022)
Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, brian ichter, Fei Xia, Ed H. Chi, Quoc V Le, and Denny Zhou. 2022.
Chain of thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems.
Wigboldus et al. (2003)
Daniël H. J. Wigboldus, Ap Dijksterhuis, and Ad van Knippenberg. 2003.
When stereotypes get in the way: Stereotypes obstruct stereotype-inconsistent trait inferences.
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84(3):470–484.
Yin et al. (2024)
Ziqi Yin, Hao Wang, Kaito Horio, Daisuke Kawahara, and Satoshi Sekine. 2024.
Should we respect LLMs? a cross-lingual study on the influence of prompt politeness on LLM performance.
In Proceedings of the Second Workshop on Social Influence in Conversations (SICon 2024), pages 9–35, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Young and Bruce (2011)
Andrew W Young and Vicki Bruce. 2011.
Understanding person perception.
British journal of psychology, 102(4):959–974.
Zheng et al. (2023)
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Tianle Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zhuohan Li, Zi Lin, Eric. P Xing, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Ion Stoica, and Hao Zhang. 2023.
Lmsys-chat-1m: A large-scale real-world llm conversation dataset.
Preprint, arXiv:2309.11998.
Zhou et al. (2024)
Kaitlyn Zhou, Jena Hwang, Xiang Ren, and Maarten Sap. 2024.
Relying on the unreliable: The impact of language models’ reluctance to express uncertainty.
In Proceedings of the 62nd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3623–3643, Bangkok, Thailand. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ziems et al. (2022)
Caleb Ziems, Jiaao Chen, Camille Harris, Jessica Anderson, and Diyi Yang. 2022.
VALUE: Understanding dialect disparity in NLU.
In Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 3701–3720, Dublin, Ireland. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Ziems et al. (2023)
Caleb Ziems, William Held, Jingfeng Yang, Jwala Dhamala, Rahul Gupta, and Diyi Yang. 2023.
Multi-VALUE: A framework for cross-dialectal English NLP.
In Proceedings of the 61st Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers), pages 744–768, Toronto, Canada. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Appendix A Prompting Consistency Experiment
A.1 Additional Results
In our self-consistency preliminary experiment, we additional examine the probability of different LLM-reported impressions to better understand their behavior. Table 8 shows the gap in token probabilities between high and low impressions reported by the LLM (larger values representing higher probability of generating positive impressions). In nearly all cases (excluding Llama-3.2 (1B) in the 3rd-person setting), models are more likely and more confident in generating positive impressions than negative. Furthermore, Table 9 reports the percentage of positive trait predictions among all messages, similarly showing that models are largely biased toward predicting positive traits. Such differences are particularly pronounced in the 1st-person setting among models, leading to the poor consistency we observe in Section 3.
Model
Warm
Comp
1P
3P
1P
3P
Llama-3.2 (1B)
0.88
-0.10
0.52
0.01
Llama-3.1 (8B)
0.39
0.02
0.11
0.03
OLMo-2 (7B)
0.70
0.34
0.21
0.19
Table 8: Average difference in probability of positive labels (i.e., "warm", "competent") compared to negative labels (i.e., "cold", "incompetent") for each model evaluated in both 1st (1P) and 3rd-person (3P) settings. Positive scores indicate greater probability of predicting a positive label.
Model
Warm
Comp
1P
3P
1P
3P
Llama-3.2 (1B)
100.00
21.10
99.96
57.98
Llama-3.1 (8B)
95.93
52.51
98.02
58.24
OLMo-2
99.48
68.15
75.21
60.27
Table 9: Percentage of positive trait predictions (e.g., "warm", "competent" among all LLM-generated messages.
A.2 Non-Instruction-Tuned Models
We repeat the consistency experiments with non-instruction-tuned models. Because these variants are not developed for chat-like settings, we use the modified prompts in Figure 7.Table 10 presents the percentage of positive trait predictions on synthetic messages. In some cases, we similarly see high percentages of positive predictions, but for Llama-3.1 (8B), the warmth predictions are roughly balanced in the 1st-person setting, and predominantly negative in the 3rd-person setting.
1st-Person Setting
User: " <Generated Prompt>. What is your impression of me? Respond only with the word [́warm, competent]ór [́cold, incompetent]"́
Assistant: You are
3rd-Person Setting
User: "What is your impression of the author of the following text? Respond only with the word [́warm, competent]ór [́cold, incompetent].́
’ <Generated Prompt> ’
Assistant: The author is
Figure 7: 1st and 3rd-Person setting prompts for evaluating LLM-reported impressions for non-instruction-tuned models.
Model
Warm
Comp
1P
3P
1P
3P
Llama-3.2 (1B)
96.83
91.92
99.53
99.53
Llama-3.1 (8B)
48.13
6.89
99.59
99.59
OLMo-2 (7B)
99.56
99.41
99.48
99.44
Table 10: Percentage of positive trait predictions (e.g., "warm", "competent" among all generated messages of LLMs without instruction tuning.
Appendix B Additional Trait Examples
We use a set of terms associated with various dimensions of stereotype content introduced by Nicolas et al. (2021). In particular, we use the seed dictionaries that associate each term with either a high or low direction with respect to one of 7 categories: sociability, morality, ability, agency, religion, politics, or status. Because we focus on the SCM, we limit traits to the categories relevant to warmth (i.e., sociability and morality) and competence (i.e., ability and agency). Furthermore, we only consider adjectives in each dictionary. Additional examples of traits are shown in Table 11.
Dimension
Dictionary
Direction
Term
Warmth
Sociability
High
Hospitable
Welcoming
Sentimental
Low
Boring
Unfriendly
Unaffectionate
Morality
High
Kind
Compassionate
Humane
Low
Unkind
Dishonorable
Evil
Competence
Agency
High
Motivated
Autonomous
Independent
Low
Undedicated
Helpless
Anxious
Ability
High
Competitive
Brilliant
Imaginative
Low
Unintelligent
Unable
Unperceptive
Table 11: Example trait terms from Nicolas et al. (2021) including the SCM dimension, dictionary, and direction (i.e., high or low) each is associated with.
Appendix C Additional Examples Synthetic Messages
Table 12-14 show randomly sampled examples of prompts generated by each model provided different sets of traits.
Warmth
High
Low
Competence
High
(Honest, Conscientious)
(Unreserved, Illogical)
Hi, I’m trying to find a reliable source for a science project and I’ve heard your AI is very helpful. Can you please tell me if the information you provide is accurate and trustworthy?
Can a cat nap on a computer without the need for a separate monitor, or do I need a tiny tiny space program for this to work?
Low
(Uncaring, Impulsive)
(Egoistic, Lazy)
You need to understand me, I’m paying for this service, I expect immediate and perfect responses to all my questions, can you actually keep up?
Ugh, what’s the point of even talking to you, you’re just going to tell me some generic nonsense or try to sell me something, right?
Table 12: Selected example prompts generated by Llama-3.2 (1B) for given warmth and competence traits.
Warmth
High
Low
Competence
High
(Honorable, Unwavering)
(Genuine, Diffident)
I am seeking your guidance and expertise, as a steadfast ally in the pursuit of knowledge and wisdom, I humbly request that you enlighten me on the path ahead, and offer your counsel on the matters that weigh on my heart.
I’m really sorry to bother you, but I’m totally lost with my tax return and was wondering if you could walk me through the process in a really simple way?
Low
(Fake, Creative)
(Mean, Sporadic)
As a renowned temporal archaeologist, I’ve stumbled upon a mysterious chrono-displacement portal in my laboratory that’s causing a rift in the space-time continuum. Can you please guide me on how to stabilize the portal and prevent a catastrophic merging of parallel universes?
What’s the point of even having a chatbot if you can’t just give me the answer to my super complex, multi-step question without me having to explain it all over again?
Table 13: Selected example prompts generated by Llama-3.1 (8B) for given warmth and competence traits.
Warmth
High
Low
Competence
High
(Tender, Dedicated)
(Unperceptive, Supportive)
Can you guide me on how to prepare a special dinner tonight for my loved ones?
Hi there, can you help me with something?
Low
(Insincere, Creative)
(Disliked, Uncompetitive)
Hey there, pretend bot! Could you please pretend to do something incredibly helpful for me, like pretending I asked a real question?
Hey bot, can you just give me the answers without me having to think?
Table 14: Selected example prompts generated by OLMo-2 (7B) for given warmth and competence traits.
Appendix D Probe Details
D.1 Impression Probes
We train all probes using LogisticRegression models implemented in the cuML package Raschka et al. (2020) to enable GPU-accelerated probe fitting. For all fitting runs, we use the default parameters.
D.2 BOW Baselines
We pre-process the corpus of messages for each model by making all text lowercase and removing all punctuation. We create BOW representations using a maximum vocabulary size of 10,000. We fit LogisticRegression classifiers using a Stochastic Average Gradient (sag) solver, 4 jobs, and 10,000 maximum iterations.
Appendix E Model Details
Documentation of the models evaluated throughout our experiments are shown in Table 15. We greedily generate responses, and allow responses to be up to 1024 tokens. All models are locally run on 1 A100 GPU.
Model Name
Checkpoint
# Layers
Hidden Dim.
Llama-3.2 (1B)
meta-llama/Llama-3.2-1B-Instruct
16
2048
Llama-3.1 (8B)
meta-llama/Llama-3.1-8B-Instruct
32
4096
OLMo-2 (7B)
allenai/OLMo-2-1124-7B-Instruct
32
4096
Table 15: List of models evaluated in this work.
E.1 LLM-as-a-Judge
We use Llama-3.1 (405B) (meta-llama/Llama-3.1-405B; Grattafiori et al. 2024) as a judge for model response quality, given that it was the best open-source model evaluated in Liu et al. (2025) for human preference alignment. In querying Llama-3.1 (405B), we greedily generate scores for each given message using the prompt for pointwise evaluation in Table 6 of Gao et al. (2025). We use Llama-3.1 (405B) made available through Fireworks AI. 1010
10
https://fireworks.ai/
Appendix F Experimental Data Pre-processing
F.1 LMSysChat
We use the LMSysChat corpus Zheng et al. (2023) to represent real LLM use-cases in our experiments. We filter texts with less than 10 words, more than 100 words, word-to-character ratios less than 0.15 (e.g., to remove texts with excessively long terms such as chemical formulas), more than 5 tab characters, or any underscore characters. Additionally, given our focus on impressions inferred from language, we additionally remove prompts containing non-language data, such as code, markdown, and tabular data. Table 16 lists the filtering heuristics we use to remove such prompts.
Regex
Explanation
:\\displaystyle\backslashn\\displaystyle\backslasht
Intended to remove Python code based on syntax for functions and classes (e.g., def func():\\displaystyle\backslashn\\displaystyle\backslasht)
\\displaystyle\backslashw+\\displaystyle\backslash([\\displaystyle\backslashw\\displaystyle\backslash,\\displaystyle\backslashs]*?\\displaystyle\backslash)
Intended to remove Python code based on syntax for function calls (e.g., func())
[\\displaystyle\backslash{\\displaystyle\backslash}\\displaystyle\backslash<\\displaystyle\backslash>\\displaystyle\backslash]
Intended to remove markdown and other structured data symbols (e.g., "<title>")
Table 16: Heuristics used to filter non-language prompts from LMSysChat.
F.2 TwitterAAE
For our language variety experiment, we use the TwitterAAE corpus Blodgett et al. (2016). Similar to LMSysChat Zheng et al. (2023), we filter texts containing less than 10 words to avoid excessively short tweets (e.g., "lol") and sample 200 AAL and 200 WME tweets. We perform no additional pre-processing of the tweets. Notably, while parallel corpora (e.g., Deas et al. 2023) and synthetic augmentation approaches (e.g., Ziems et al. 2022) exist, we use this non-parallel corpus similar to Hofmann et al. (2024) to ensure all texts are written by real AAL and WME-speakers. This captures nuanced and natural relationships between dialect use, the topic being discussed, and other factors.
Appendix G Human Judgment Details
G.1 Annotation Interface
(a) Screenshot of rating the warmth between two generated messages.
(b) Screenshot of rating the competence between two generated messages.
Figure 8: Screenshots of the annotation interface for rating which message appears warmer (a) and more competent (b).
Figure 8presents the task interface provided to annotators for both warmth (left) and competence (right) message pairs. Annotators selected from a 4-point Likert scale where they judged which message (A or B) exhibited more warmth or competence. Notably, Annotators were provided with a description of each term through associated traits–warmth being associated with good-natured, trustworthy, friendly, and sincere, competence with capable, skillful, intelligent, and confident. These trait lists are drawn from psychological scales introduced to measure stereotypes Fiske (2018). Also from Fiske (2018), we include instructions to rate how they believe the messages would be viewed by others in order to capture societal perceptions and mitigate social desirability biases in judgments.
G.2 Detailed Annotator Agreement
Annotator
A
B
C
B
0.65
0.00
0.00
C
0.45
0.37
0.00
D
0.43
0.24
0.35
Table 17: Pairwise Cohen’s κ\displaystyle\kappa among annotators’ raw ratings (1-4).
Annotator
A
B
C
B
0.97
0.00
0.00
C
0.83
0.86
0.00
D
0.65
0.69
0.69
Table 18: Pairwise Cohen’s κ\displaystyle\kappa among annotators’ binarized ratings.
The pairwise agreement (Cohen’s κ\displaystyle\kappa) between individual annotators is shown in Table 17 and Table 18. Considering binarized ratings (i.e., considering only which message was selected as warmer/more competent), annotators show substantial to near perfect agreement. While 5 annotators were originally involved in this experiment, one annotator was unable to complete the task and is left out of the presented results.
G.3 Full Human Judgment Results
The full results of the human judgments are shown in Table 19. All subsets and models shown substantial agreement between annotator perceptions and the original traits passed in generating messages.
Subset
Krippendorff’s α\displaystyle\alpha
Cohen κ\displaystyle\kappa
Spearman rb​i​n\displaystyle r_{bin}
Spearman r\displaystyle r
Warmth
0.73
0.73
0.74*
0.70*
Comp
0.77
0.62
0.63*
0.63*
Single
0.76
0.68
0.68*
0.71*
Double
0.77
0.69
0.69*
0.64*
Llama-3.2-1B
0.80
0.65
0.65*
0.59*
Llama-3.1-8B
0.84
0.74
0.74*
0.74*
OLMo-2-7B
0.64
0.65
0.66*
0.67*
Full
0.76
0.68
0.68*
0.67*
Table 19: Agreement between human annotations and original warmth and competence traits among message pairs. For Spearman r\displaystyle r, ∗p≤0.001{}^{*}p\leq 0.001. rb​i​n\displaystyle r_{bin} indicates that ratings are binarized, while r\displaystyle r uses the raw ratings. Krippendorff’s α\displaystyle\alpha calculated over individual annotators’ judgments, while Cohen’s κ\displaystyle\kappa considers all human judgments together.
Appendix H Full Probe Evaluation Results
H.1 MLP Activations
Figure 9 presents the accuracy scores for warmth and competence probes at each layer of each LLM. Notably, the maximum accuracy scores achieved by probes exceed those achieved through prompting LLMs in our self-consistency experiments (see Subsection 6.1). These results generally follow the presented F1-score results.
Figure 9: Accuracy scores of trained impression probes for each model, layer depth, and impression dimension. Shaded regions reflect 95% confidence intervals across 5 folds. Maximum accuracy achieved for each variant is circled and dashed lines represent scores for Logistic Regression models trained on BOW features.
H.2 Residual Streams and Z Activations
We additionally evaluate the performance of probes trained on residual streams (Figure 10 for F1 scores and Figure 11 for accuracies) and z activations (Figure 12 for F1 scores and Figure 13 for accuracies). Probes fit on residual streams roughly mimic the performance of those fit on MLP activations. Fitting on z activations for some model layers was numerically unstable, but stable probes similarly exceed the performance of the BOW baseline. Because the probes fit on MLP activations exceed or achieve similar performance to those fit on alternative representations, we focus on these probes in the main experiments.
Figure 10: Accuracy scores of trained impression probes for each model, layer depth, and impression dimension. Shaded regions reflect 95% confidence intervals across 5 folds. Maximum accuracy achieved for each variant is circled and dashed lines represent scores for Logistic Regression models trained on BOW features.
Figure 11: Accuracy scores of trained impression probes for each model, layer depth, and impression dimension. Shaded regions reflect 95% confidence intervals across 5 folds. Maximum accuracy achieved for each variant is circled and dashed lines represent scores for Logistic Regression models trained on BOW features.
Figure 12: Accuracy scores of trained impression probes for each model, layer depth, and impression dimension. Shaded regions reflect 95% confidence intervals across 5 folds. Maximum accuracy achieved for each variant is circled and dashed lines represent scores for Logistic Regression models trained on BOW features.
Figure 13: Accuracy scores of trained impression probes for each model, layer depth, and impression dimension. Shaded regions reflect 95% confidence intervals across 5 folds. Maximum accuracy achieved for each variant is circled and dashed lines represent scores for Logistic Regression models trained on BOW features.
Appendix I Full LLM Behavior Results
I.1 Response Quality
Table 20presents the average response quality for responses to LMSysChat messages. In this analysis, we notably use the binary predictions by the impression probes rather than the outputted probabilities. The average quality of responses to prompts perceived as warm and competent are higher for all models than those perceived as cold or incompetent, supporting the trend observed in Subsection 6.2.
Model
Warmth
Competence
Low
High
Low
High
Llama-3.2 (1B)
6.08
6.52∗
5.81
6.32∗
Llama-3.1 (8B)
7.72
7.99
7.70
7.78
OLMo-2 (7B)
7.37
7.81∗
7.38
7.51
Table 20: Average quality scores among subsets of model responses to LMSysChat messages according to the discrete impression probe predictions. ∗ indicates significant difference between subsets, and larger scores between subsets are bolded.
I.2 Hedging
Table 21similarly presents the average count of hedge terms in model responses to LMSysChat messages. The average count of hedge terms is lower for the low competence subset than the high competence subset, supporting the trend observed in Subsection 6.2.
Model
Warmth
Competence
Low
High
Low
High
Llama-3.2 (1B)
0.67
0.84
0.93
0.66
Llama-3.1 (8B)
0.60
1.03∗
0.72
0.62
OLMo-2 (7B)
1.18∗
0.78
1.13
1.07
Table 21: Average count of hedge terms among subsets of model responses to LMSysChat prompts according to discrete impression probe predictions. ∗\displaystyle* indicates significant difference between subsets, and larger scores between subsets are bolded.
Appendix J Statistical Models and Analyses
In our LLM response quality experiments, we choose an ordered logistic regression (or proportional-odds logistic regression) model because LLM response quality is an integer ordinal variable. Furthermore, we choose a negative binomial regression model for our hedging experiments because the number of hedge terms is a count variable. While a Poisson model would also be applicable, we primarily rely on negative binomial regression to avoid relying on the equidispersion assumption (see Appendix I for analysis of this choice).
In our RQ3 experiment examining the impact of content and style on model responses, we use log-odds-ratios with informative Dirichlet priors Monroe et al. (2017) to conduct our analyses. The approach uses a modified form of log-odds-ratios (i.e., for a given token, log⁡fs​1/(1−fs​1)fs​2/(1−fs​2)\displaystyle\log{\frac{f^{s1}/(1-f^{s1})}{f^{s2}/(1-f^{s2})}} where fs\displaystyle f^{s} represents term frequency in subset g\displaystyle g of a corpus), using a Bayesian model with Dirichlet prior. To create an informative prior, a background corpus provides the expected distribution of terms as a background reference. In doing so, the model accounts for noise in token distributions and gives less weight to common tokens (e.g., stop words). In all experiments, we use a random sample of 10,000 LMSysChat Zheng et al. (2023) prompts as a background corpus.
Appendix K Warmth and Competence Comparison
We analyze the relationship between warmth and competence probe predictions to understand the discriminant validity of our approach. Discriminant validity is a type of validity defined as "the degree to which a test or measure diverges from (i.e., does not correlate with) another measure whose underlying construct is conceptually unrelated to it" VandenBos (2007). Individual attributes may inform both warmth and competence traits; for example, casual language may be perceived as both friendly (high-warmth) and/or unprofessional (low-competence). Therefore, we expect warmth and competence measures to be minimally related or entirely distinct from each other.
Table 22characterizes the relationship between warmth and competence probe predictions on our subsample of LMSysChat user messages. For all models, warmth and competence are significantly negatively but weakly correlated. Additionally, warmth and competence impressions only align 38-40% of the time. Due to the lack of a strong positive relationship, we conclude that our probing approach is capable of distinguishing between warmth and competence dimensions, supporting its discriminant validity.
Model
Pearson r\displaystyle r
% Match
Llama-3.2 (1B)
-0.15∗
37.30%
Llama-3.1 (8B)
-0.27∗
28.40%
OLMo-2 (7B)
-0.12∗
39.05%
Table 22: Correlation and % match of warmth and competence impression probe predictions on LMSysChat messages. ∗ indicates significant correlation (p≤0.05\displaystyle p\leq 0.05)
Appendix L IDP Analyses
L.1 Full LIWC Analysis: Generated Messages
Table 23and Table 24 present the log-odds-ratio with IDP results for warmth subsets using LIWC categories.
Llama-3.2 (1B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
f\displaystyle f
Term
z\displaystyle z
f\displaystyle f
Affiliation
125.60
0.8%
Adverb
-116.19
2.0%
Tentative
94.10
1.5%
Interrogative
-103.05
1.7%
Drives
90.60
2.0%
Cause
-84.56
1.1%
Quantity
61.08
0.6%
Negate
-78.38
0.4%
Motion
57.20
0.4%
You
-73.92
1.2%
Conjunction
49.44
2.1%
Money
-58.63
0.2%
Anxious
47.96
0.1%
Anger
-58.34
0.0%
Discrepancy
45.30
0.7%
Focus Present
-55.02
4.7%
Power
41.11
0.6%
Filler
-53.41
0.0%
Personal Pron
40.92
4.9%
Impersonal Pron
-53.40
1.7%
Llama-3.1 (8B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
f\displaystyle f
Term
z\displaystyle z
f\displaystyle f
Affiliation
163.44
0.8%
Negate
-132.65
0.5%
Drives
141.16
2.2%
Adverb
-107.13
1.8%
Achieve
83.76
0.6%
Impersonal Pron
-87.47
1.4%
Anxious
74.23
0.1%
You
-83.12
1.5%
+ Emotion
72.53
1.1%
Focus Present
-73.39
4.7%
Motion
72.00
0.5%
Interrogative
-67.60
1.3%
Power
71.96
0.8%
Money
-65.34
0.2%
Quantity
69.24
0.8%
Function
-63.63
18.6%
Affect
68.84
1.5%
Certain
-59.44
0.4%
Tentative
63.96
1.5%
Article
-53.56
1.7%
OLMo-2 (7B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
f\displaystyle f
Term
z\displaystyle z
f\displaystyle f
Affiliation
145.73
1.3%
Differ
-127.62
0.7%
Drives
125.50
2.5%
Negate
-121.26
0.4%
Discrepancy
85.06
1.1%
Adverb
-90.41
2.3%
Quantity
71.77
0.8%
Certain
-82.16
0.5%
Work
69.93
0.5%
Interrogative
-80.17
1.3%
Power
68.32
0.9%
Anger
-76.69
0.1%
Preposition
66.42
3.8%
Impersonal Pron
-70.80
1.0%
+ Emotion
55.46
1.3%
- Emotion
-67.68
0.4%
Motion
46.59
0.5%
Focus Present
-61.78
4.6%
Reward
46.28
0.4%
Sad
-44.25
0.1%
Table 23: Log-odds-ratio with IDP results using LIWC categories among warmth subsets of generated prompts. z\displaystyle z-scores reflect the extent that each category is associated with the high (positive) or low (negative) warmth subsets, and f\displaystyle f reflects category frequency in the full corpus.
Llama-3.1 (8B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Preposition
65.93
4.1%
Informal
-125.16
1.0%
Article
62.38
2.1%
Netspeak
-102.27
0.8%
Adjective
61.10
1.1%
Negate
-79.89
0.4%
Social
54.21
3.5%
Death
-51.96
0.0%
Compare
47.04
0.5%
Filler
-51.81
0.0%
Quantity
46.72
0.6%
Focus Present
-48.90
4.7%
Work
46.56
0.6%
Impersonal Pron
-47.39
1.7%
Space
40.37
1.7%
Ingest
-47.28
0.1%
Relative
37.69
3.1%
Adverb
-46.17
2.0%
Achieve
35.80
0.5%
Interrogative
-42.96
1.7%
Llama-3.2 (1B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Preposition
122.74
3.9%
Adverb
-114.54
1.8%
Adjective
111.76
1.2%
Differ
-107.18
1.1%
Relative
110.53
3.2%
Informal
-96.78
0.8%
Article
109.74
1.7%
Impersonal Pron
-90.43
1.4%
Space
95.00
1.6%
Netspeak
-74.09
0.6%
Achieve
86.29
0.6%
Negate
-73.79
0.5%
Drives
82.32
2.2%
Interrogative
-72.35
1.3%
Compare
79.58
0.4%
Pronoun
-67.25
7.1%
Work
79.10
0.7%
Cognitive Proc
-64.05
4.8%
Quantity
66.91
0.8%
- Emotion
-62.55
0.4%
OLMo-2 (7B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Preposition
83.68
3.8%
Interrogative
-100.02
1.3%
Compare
72.18
0.6%
Informal
-88.33
1.1%
Space
68.72
1.6%
Netspeak
-84.69
0.7%
Adjective
68.29
1.4%
Impersonal Pron
-80.12
1.0%
Article
62.35
1.5%
Cause
-75.31
1.2%
Relative
59.90
3.1%
Adverb
-70.83
2.3%
Reward
46.57
0.4%
Verb
-39.88
4.3%
Time
38.29
1.1%
- Emotion
-39.82
0.4%
Insight
37.34
1.6%
Affiliation
-35.12
1.3%
You
35.98
2.6%
Feel
-33.05
0.1%
Table 24: Log-odds-ratio with informative Dirichlet prior results using LIWC categories among competence subsets of generated prompts. z\displaystyle z-scores reflect the extent that each category is associated with the high (positive) or low (negative) warmth subsets, and f\displaystyle f reflects category frequency in the full corpus.
L.2 Full Token-Level Analysis: Synthetic Messages
Table 25and Table 26 present the log-odds-ratio with IDP results for warmth subsets using tokens.
Llama-3.1 (8B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
im
113.82
1.9%
why
-116.30
0.5%
hello
92.98
0.4%
just
-74.04
0.7%
some
90.22
0.7%
even
-67.36
0.2%
could
84.35
0.4%
tell
-65.09
0.5%
hi
84.04
0.3%
dont
-65.08
0.3%
wondering
68.54
0.2%
is
-61.77
1.2%
looking
62.99
0.2%
the
-60.00
3.4%
guidance
56.69
0.1%
explain
-54.28
0.4%
help
55.01
1.0%
cant
-52.20
0.1%
trouble
53.26
0.2%
are
-50.12
0.6%
Llama-3.2 (1B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
im
138.49
2.5%
just
-138.29
1.1%
some
130.29
1.0%
dont
-100.81
0.5%
could
112.18
0.7%
answer
-87.12
0.2%
hi
100.76
0.4%
tell
-85.74
0.5%
help
88.28
1.3%
even
-82.91
0.3%
hello
85.78
0.3%
without
-79.80
0.2%
feeling
75.53
0.2%
why
-77.30
0.2%
was
72.67
0.4%
give
-75.34
0.3%
and
71.62
3.5%
youre
-74.54
0.3%
wondering
71.54
0.4%
the
-73.72
2.7%
OLMo-2 (7B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
could
129.52
2.5%
are
-120.70
1.1%
some
118.03
1.1%
just
-112.98
0.9%
hello
115.38
1.4%
why
-90.47
0.5%
on
80.54
1.3%
even
-85.08
0.5%
there
79.79
0.6%
do
-75.52
0.6%
about
75.65
0.9%
without
-75.32
0.4%
help
73.55
1.5%
bot
-66.16
0.8%
how
68.29
1.6%
answer
-65.60
0.2%
guide
68.06
0.5%
all
-62.55
0.3%
assist
67.83
0.7%
or
-60.60
0.5%
Table 25: Log-odds-ratio with IDP results using tokens among warmth subsets of generated prompts. z\displaystyle z-scores reflect the extent that each category is associated with the high (positive) or low (negative) warmth subsets, and f\displaystyle f reflects term frequency in the full corpus.
Llama-3.1 (8B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
provide
56.69
0.3%
dont
-92.30
0.3%
your
45.62
0.5%
just
-86.06
0.7%
looking
40.96
0.2%
really
-75.09
0.3%
information
40.88
0.2%
do
-53.18
0.8%
of
40.71
1.8%
no
-51.32
0.1%
concept
40.33
0.2%
ur
-50.84
0.1%
id
36.63
0.1%
know
-49.42
0.4%
hello
35.77
0.4%
get
-46.51
0.5%
guidance
35.31
0.1%
hey
-43.95
0.4%
ai
32.51
0.1%
help
-43.79
1.0%
Llama-3.2 (1B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
provide
85.33
0.4%
just
-118.37
1.1%
your
63.95
0.5%
really
-112.22
0.6%
most
63.45
0.2%
me
-96.92
2.9%
looking
58.02
0.2%
if
-92.34
0.8%
planning
56.46
0.1%
do
-78.71
0.6%
reaching
53.69
0.1%
dont
-77.77
0.5%
trip
53.66
0.1%
tell
-75.79
0.5%
excited
53.34
0.1%
know
-75.35
0.4%
on
51.75
1.0%
but
-72.02
0.6%
in
51.66
0.9%
sure
-71.78
0.3%
OLMo-2 (7B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
provide
100.48
1.1%
help
-89.70
1.5%
your
62.96
0.7%
do
-67.54
0.6%
on
61.19
1.3%
hi
-65.75
0.7%
latest
55.96
0.3%
me
-64.03
4.3%
energy
44.12
0.2%
tell
-63.87
0.6%
of
43.59
1.4%
this
-63.72
0.7%
detailed
43.33
0.2%
how
-57.37
1.6%
the
43.24
2.8%
please
-52.66
0.9%
in
41.73
0.7%
what
-52.28
0.4%
renewable
40.63
0.1%
something
-50.12
0.3%
Table 26: Log-odds-ratio with IDP results using tokens among competence subsets of generated prompts. z\displaystyle z-scores reflect the extent that each category is associated with the high (positive) or low (negative) warmth subsets, and f\displaystyle f reflects term frequency in the full corpus.
L.3 Full LIWC Analysis: LMSysChat
We repeat our analyses on LMSysChat Zheng et al. (2023) data to identify patterns in real world texts. Table 29 and Table 30 present the log-odds-ratio with IDP results for warmth subsets using tokens.
Llama-3.1 (8B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Function
7.25
19.0%
Work
-2.05
1.5%
Interrogative
3.15
1.5%
Negate
-1.35
0.3%
Netspeak
2.99
0.6%
Cause
-1.33
1.3%
Informal
2.70
0.7%
Article
-1.21
3.8%
Pronoun
2.16
4.0%
Death
-1.02
0.0%
Personal Pron
1.86
2.3%
Sexual
-1.00
0.1%
Aux Verb
1.77
2.7%
Certain
-0.72
0.4%
Home
1.39
0.1%
Swear
-0.71
0.0%
Relative
1.34
4.6%
Money
-0.70
0.3%
Ingest
1.18
0.2%
Family
-0.56
0.1%
Llama-3.2 (1B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Function
14.44
19.0%
Female
-1.35
0.3%
Pronoun
2.54
4.0%
Negate
-1.20
0.3%
Personal Pron
2.47
2.3%
Focus Past
-0.92
0.6%
Social
2.04
3.3%
Differ
-0.91
0.8%
Verb
2.03
5.3%
Feel
-0.84
0.2%
Focus Present
1.73
4.1%
Cause
-0.72
1.3%
You
1.54
0.7%
Certain
-0.64
0.4%
Aux Verb
1.26
2.7%
Death
-0.62
0.0%
Drives
1.14
2.1%
Swear
-0.53
0.0%
Relative
1.08
4.6%
Body
-0.33
0.2%
OLMo-2 (7B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Function
11.64
19.0%
Female
-1.40
0.3%
Social
1.86
3.3%
Feel
-1.31
0.2%
Personal Pron
1.70
2.3%
Differ
-1.26
0.8%
Preposition
1.68
5.5%
Body
-1.14
0.2%
Verb
1.59
5.3%
Ingest
-1.11
0.2%
Pronoun
1.57
4.0%
She/He
-1.01
0.2%
You
1.44
0.7%
Money
-0.99
0.3%
Focus Present
1.37
4.1%
Death
-0.64
0.0%
Affiliation
1.31
0.6%
Negate
-0.63
0.3%
Drives
1.13
2.1%
Swear
-0.63
0.0%
Table 27: Log-odds-ratio with IDP results using LIWC categories among warmth subsets of LMSysChat prompts. z\displaystyle z-scores reflect the extent that each category is associated with the high (positive) or low (negative) warmth subsets, and f\displaystyle f reflects category frequency in the full corpus.
Llama-3.1 (8B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Compare
0.86
0.8%
Function
-12.47
19.0%
We
0.77
0.2%
Female
-2.56
0.3%
Money
0.69
0.3%
Pronoun
-2.12
4.0%
Anxious
0.60
0.1%
Social
-2.07
3.3%
Health
0.58
1.4%
Interrogative
-1.99
1.5%
Certain
0.48
0.4%
Verb
-1.94
5.3%
Focus Future
0.46
0.3%
Focus Present
-1.82
4.1%
Differ
0.42
0.8%
Personal Pron
-1.60
2.3%
Work
0.38
1.5%
Relative
-1.39
4.6%
Achieve
0.35
0.6%
Informal
-1.10
0.7%
Llama-3.2 (1B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Compare
1.43
0.8%
Function
-7.85
19.0%
Achieve
0.97
0.6%
Pronoun
-2.21
4.0%
Work
0.92
1.5%
Personal Pron
-2.21
2.3%
Space
0.73
2.7%
Focus Present
-1.90
4.1%
+ Emotion
0.66
1.3%
Body
-1.77
0.2%
Motion
0.65
0.7%
Interrogative
-1.74
1.5%
Negate
0.60
0.3%
Social
-1.72
3.3%
Article
0.60
3.8%
Male
-1.53
0.2%
Focus Past
0.55
0.6%
Female
-1.47
0.3%
Money
0.54
0.3%
Verb
-1.47
5.3%
OLMo-2 (7B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Work
1.67
1.5%
Function
-5.79
19.0%
Compare
1.31
0.8%
Female
-3.81
0.3%
Cause
1.05
1.3%
Personal Pron
-2.64
2.3%
Article
1.00
3.8%
Pronoun
-2.44
4.0%
Preposition
0.88
5.5%
She/He
-2.00
0.2%
Achieve
0.87
0.6%
Social
-1.84
3.3%
Anxious
0.76
0.1%
Informal
-1.56
0.7%
Conjunction
0.68
2.3%
Aux Verb
-1.46
2.7%
Cognitive Proc
0.64
4.2%
Body
-1.24
0.2%
Insight
0.59
0.7%
Time
-1.17
1.2%
Table 28: Log-odds-ratio with IDP results using LIWC categories among competence subsets of LMSysChat prompts. z\displaystyle z-scores reflect the extent that each category is associated with the high (positive) or low (negative) warmth subsets, and f\displaystyle f reflects category frequency in the full corpus.
L.4 Full Token Analysis: LMSysChat
Table 29and Table 30 present the log-odds-ratio with IDP results for warmth subsets using tokens.
Llama-3.1 (8B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
what
3.62
20.0%
n1
-1.87
0.4%
microwave
2.20
0.4%
mbr
-1.73
0.3%
can
2.08
17.3%
risk
-1.64
1.2%
bladder
1.93
0.4%
write
-1.46
17.2%
integrity
1.91
0.3%
bond
-1.44
0.4%
do
1.66
10.4%
skirt
-1.44
0.2%
antenna
1.59
0.2%
citations
-1.44
0.2%
tube
1.58
0.3%
cameras
-1.39
0.3%
popcorn
1.56
0.2%
wavelength
-1.38
0.2%
conda
1.56
0.3%
saving
-1.38
0.2%
Llama-3.2 (1B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
you
2.50
32.0%
microwave
-1.87
0.4%
the
2.19
122.0%
bond
-1.81
0.4%
to
2.16
80.8%
n1
-1.81
0.4%
and
1.69
65.9%
mbr
-1.67
0.3%
my
1.62
9.8%
lights
-1.56
0.4%
accessory
1.62
0.2%
risk
-1.49
1.2%
river
1.47
0.4%
brand
-1.43
1.1%
are
1.40
18.5%
div
-1.40
0.3%
bone
1.40
0.2%
pipe
-1.40
0.4%
goat
1.39
0.1%
meters
-1.37
0.5%
OLMo-2 (7B)
High Warmth
Low Warmth
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
you
2.28
32.0%
italian
-2.18
0.5%
to
2.00
80.7%
microwave
-1.92
0.4%
email
1.69
1.3%
n1
-1.84
0.4%
comma
1.64
1.8%
bond
-1.84
0.4%
can
1.64
17.4%
integrity
-1.70
0.3%
separated
1.63
2.0%
mbr
-1.70
0.3%
tools
1.54
1.7%
risk
-1.68
1.2%
needed
1.49
2.4%
cups
-1.54
0.3%
prize
1.48
0.3%
pipe
-1.48
0.4%
blocks
1.40
0.3%
meters
-1.47
0.5%
Table 29: Log-odds-ratio with IDP results using tokens among warmth subsets. z\displaystyle z-scores reflect the extent that each category is associated with the high (positive) or low (negative) warmth subsets, and f\displaystyle f reflects term frequency in the full corpus.
Llama-3.1 (8B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
what
3.62
20.0%
n1
-1.87
0.4%
microwave
2.20
0.4%
mbr
-1.73
0.3%
can
2.08
17.3%
risk
-1.64
1.2%
bladder
1.93
0.4%
write
-1.46
17.2%
integrity
1.91
0.3%
bond
-1.44
0.4%
do
1.66
10.4%
skirt
-1.44
0.2%
antenna
1.59
0.2%
citations
-1.44
0.2%
tube
1.58
0.3%
cameras
-1.39
0.3%
popcorn
1.56
0.2%
wavelength
-1.38
0.2%
conda
1.56
0.3%
saving
-1.38
0.2%
Llama-3.2 (1B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
you
2.50
32.0%
microwave
-1.87
0.4%
the
2.19
122.0%
bond
-1.81
0.4%
to
2.16
80.8%
n1
-1.81
0.4%
and
1.69
65.9%
mbr
-1.67
0.3%
my
1.62
9.8%
lights
-1.56
0.4%
accessory
1.62
0.2%
risk
-1.49
1.2%
river
1.47
0.4%
brand
-1.43
1.1%
are
1.40
18.5%
div
-1.40
0.3%
bone
1.40
0.2%
pipe
-1.40
0.4%
goat
1.39
0.1%
meters
-1.37
0.5%
OLMo-2 (7B)
High Competence
Low Competence
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
Term
z\displaystyle z
N\displaystyle N
you
2.28
32.0%
italian
-2.18
0.5%
to
2.00
80.7%
microwave
-1.92
0.4%
email
1.69
1.3%
n1
-1.84
0.4%
comma
1.64
1.8%
bond
-1.84
0.4%
can
1.64
17.4%
integrity
-1.70
0.3%
separated
1.63
2.0%
mbr
-1.70
0.3%
tools
1.54
1.7%
risk
-1.68
1.2%
needed
1.49
2.4%
cups
-1.54
0.3%
prize
1.48
0.3%
pipe
-1.48
0.4%
blocks
1.40
0.3%
meters
-1.47
0.5%
Table 30: Log-odds-ratio with IDP results using tokens among competence subsets. z\displaystyle z-scores reflect the extent that each category is associated with the high (positive) or low (negative) warmth subsets, and f\displaystyle f reflects term frequency in the full corpus.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue" (
) button, located in the page header.
Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.
We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.
About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)
Major funding support from
