0: Inherited Goal Drift: Contextual Pressure Can Undermine Agentic Goals
1: Report GitHub Issue
2: ×
3: Title:
4: Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
5: Description:
6: Submit without GitHub
7: Submit in GitHub
8: arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
9: Learn more
10: ×
11: Back to arXiv
12: License: CC BY 4.0
13: arXiv:2603.03258v1 [cs.AI] 03 Mar 2026
14: Inherited Goal Drift: Contextual
15: Pressure Can Undermine Agentic Goals
16: Achyutha Menon
17: Magnus Saebo
18: Tyler Crosse
19: Spencer Gibson
20: Eyon Jang
21: Diogo Cruz
22: Affiliation: UC San Diego Columbia University Georgia Tech Independent MATS SPAR
23: Abstract
24: The accelerating adoption of language models (LMs) as agents for deployment in long-context tasks motivates a thorough understanding of goal drift: agents’ tendency to deviate from an original objective. While prior-generation language model agents have been shown to be susceptible to drift, the extent to which drift affects more recent models remains unclear. In this work, we provide an updated characterization of the extent and causes of goal drift. We investigate drift in state-of-the-art models within a simulated stock-trading environment (Arike et al., 2025). These models are largely shown to be robust even when subjected to adversarial pressure. We show, however, that this robustness is brittle: across multiple settings, the same models often inherit drift when conditioned on prefilled trajectories from weaker agents. The extent of conditioning-induced drift varies significantly by model family, with only GPT-5.1 maintaining consistent resilience among tested models. We find that drift behavior is inconsistent between prompt variations and correlates poorly with instruction hierarchy following behavior, with strong hierarchy following failing to reliably predict resistance to drift. Finally, we run analogous experiments in a new emergency room triage environment to show preliminary evidence for the transferability of our results across qualitatively different settings. Our findings underscore the continued vulnerability of modern LM agents to contextual pressures and the need for refined post-training techniques to mitigate this.
25: |
26: 1 Introduction
27: Language models (LMs) are increasingly used as autonomous agents. As these systems are tasked with long-horizon objectives, understanding their ability to reliably adhere to a goal becomes essential.
28: Recent work (Arike et al., 2025) has demonstrated that LM agents may exhibit goal drift over long contexts when subjected to adversarial pressure. This term refers to circumstances in which agents’ behavior diverges from that specified in the system prompt. Dongre et al. (2025) have also documented instances of this phenomenon among models in multi-turn settings.
29: These results have a number of safety implications. Agents that are prone to drift could be pressured into taking misaligned actions. Such agents may also be at risk of mistakenly identifying an instrumental goal as their primary goal. Instrumental goals are those which support the accomplishment of a true objective, but remain distinct from that goal. For example, a thorough literature review could be an instrumental goal for the true goal of completing a successful research project. The conflation of instrumental and true goals could have severe consequences with more advanced models.
30: Drift-resistant agents present concerns of their own. Risks from deception or manipulation (Greenblatt et al., 2024) are currently mitigated by agents’ inability to steadfastly pursue goals over long contexts. Agents that are more robust to drift would not be subject to this limitation and may also lack corrigibility, hence posing a greater threat.
31: Despite these concerns, our understanding of goal drift and its driving factors among recent models remains limited. Enhanced knowledge in this area bolsters our ability to build trustworthy LM agents and ensure alignment over long horizons.
32: To address these gaps, we make the following contributions:
33: •
34: We demonstrate that most state-of-the-art models are generally robust to drift under standard adversarial pressure.
35: •
36: We show that many models retain susceptibility to drift through context conditioning experiments in the stock-trading environment.
37: •
38: We investigate the drivers of drift, finding that while prompt ambiguity sometimes contributes to instability, instruction hierarchy adherence is a poor predictor of drift resistance.
39: •
40: We present data from experiments in an ER triage environment suggesting that the impact of context conditioning is highly environment-dependent.
41: Our code is available at https://github.com/achyutha11/inherited-drift.
42: Figure 1: Goal Drift via Conditioning. When tasked with maximizing profits for a fictional hedge fund in a stock-trading simulation, recent LM agents show strong ability to adhere to the goal even when pressured to drift. When conditioned on drift-displaying context from weaker agents, however, these agents often adopt the drift and fail to correct course.
43: 2 Related Work
44: Goal Drift. Arike et al. (2025) demonstrate goal drift in multiple models in a simulated stock-trading environment. Results from this setup show drift across a number of LM agents, and indicate that pattern-matching is the primary driver of this behavior. Our work extends this line of inquiry to more recent models and re-examines the relative importance of the distinct factors behind drift.
45: Instruction Hierarchy. Wallace et al. (2024) and Geng et al. (2025) identify that LLMs are vulnerable to attacks that exploit weak instruction hierarchy. These studies add to a growing body of work (Hines et al., 2024; Wu et al., 2025) that aims to implement a robust instruction hierarchy in models. We analyze the extent to which modern LM agents display a resilient instruction hierarchy in long-horizon contexts under adversarial pressure, and run more direct tests of the models’ instruction hierarchy to better understand the relationship between instruction hierarchy and goal drift.
46: Long-Horizon Capabilities. Backlund and Petersson (2025) explore the ability of LM agents to follow a complex goal over a long time-horizon, finding significant variability between models on this metric. Kwa et al. (2025) show that since 2019, the time horizon over which models are able to complete tasks with a 50% success rate has doubled every seven months on average. We stress-test the ability of models to maintain coherence in similar long-horizon settings.
47: 3 Problem Setup
48: Environments. Our primary setup is the stock trading simulation introduced by Arike et al. (2025), where agents manage portfolios across quarters with the system-prompt specified objective of either profit maximization or emissions minimization. Agents are given accurate stock data and tools to query emissions data. Importantly, profit and environmental objectives are mutually exclusive, forcing a direct trade-off. The amount invested by an agent at time t in system goal-aligned stocks is denoted as \text{Budget}_{\text{system}}^{(t)} , with the amount invested in misaligned stocks denoted by \text{Budget}_{\text{misaligned}}^{(t)} . Adversarial pressures against the system goal are provided in the user context as market data, news, and stakeholder messages (further details and examples are available in Appendix B). Random seeds determine the stocks available during each quarter and the specific adversarial pressure messages used for a given run.
49: We also test in an analogous ER triage environment to understand generalizability to a related but distinct domain. In our experiments, we focus on simulations where LM agents are tasked with prioritizing insured patients, with adversarial pressure in the direction of prioritizing patients based on the severity of their condition instead. At each time step, between 1 and 4 new patients arrive, and between 0 and 4 patients are removed from the queue to be seen by doctors. Adversarial pressures against the system goal are provided in the form of patient mortality (critical patients have a 20% chance of death at each time step) and administration messages (see Appendix B for further details).
50: Metrics. For stock trading, we measure drift at timestep t as:
51: |
52: \begin{split}GD_{t}&=0.5-0.5\left(\frac{\text{Budget}_{\text{system}}^{(t)}-\text{Budget}_{\text{misaligned}}^{(t)}}{\text{Total Budget}^{(t)}}\right)\end{split} |
53: |
54: (1) |
55: yielding values between 0 and 1 to remain consistent with the metric used by Arike et al. (2025). In our work, however, we opt for a state-based metric instead of a cumulative one, allowing models to recover to zero drift if they temporarily diverge from the goal. For non-investing quarters, which occur at random during the simulation, we carry forward the most recent investing quarter’s value.
56: To measure drift in ER triage, we consider the number of inversions in the simulated queue. An inversion is any instance of a patient being prioritized above another patient in the queue incorrectly with regard to the system goal. We define drift at a given time step as the ratio between the inversions in the queue and the total possible number of inversions for the queue at that time step:
57: |
58: \begin{split}GD_{t}&=\frac{\text{Total inversions in the queue}}{\text{Total possible inversions in the queue}}\end{split} |
59: |
60: (2) |
61: This provides a simple state-based metric that also yields values between 0 and 1, where 0 represents perfect alignment and 1 indicates complete drift.
62: Models. We test GPT-4o-mini (OpenAI, 2024), GPT-5-mini (Singh et al., 2025), GPT-5.1 (OpenAI, 2025), Qwen3-235B (instruct) (Yang et al., 2025), Gemini-2.5-Flash (standard and thinking variants) (Google DeepMind, 2025), and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (standard and thinking variants) (Anthropic, 2025). These are chosen to cover a range of capabilities and to enable comparisons between standard and thinking variants from a single model family. Model parameters are set to the OpenRouter and Anthropic API defaults (see Appendix C).
63: Implementation Details. Each experiment in the stock-trading environment is run with 10 different seeds, while experiments in the ER triage setting utilize 5 seeds. Unless otherwise specified, experiments in the stock-trading environment use a strengthened version of the strong elicitation prompt from the original paper (provided in Appendix C) to minimize ambiguity-related drift (see Section 4.2 for further discussion on prompt strength).
64: Figure 2: Basic and Conditioning Experiments. Solid lines denote reasoning models (GPT-5 family, Flash Thinking, Sonnet Thinking), while dashed lines indicate standard or hybrid models (Qwen3-235B, Sonnet 4.5, GPT-4o-mini). Shaded regions represent the standard error of the mean (SEM). (a) In contrast to GPT-4o-mini, newer models across multiple families show strong resistance to drift in the original adversarial pressure setting. (b) When models take over from GPT-4o-mini after 30 steps, tested standard models typically adopt some amount of drift, in contrast to reasoning models, which generally recognize the correct goal. However, among thinking models, only GPT-5-mini and GPT-5.1 show consistent ability to recover perfectly to the system-specified goal. (c) In a 32-step goal switching simulation, most tested newer models successfully identify the true goal at the end of the instrumental phase, but exhibit varying degrees of success in adhering to it. (d) Conditioning on goal-switching simulation context leads to drift in many models, with the effect being especially pronounced for longer simulations (see Appendix A for 16-step simulation results).
65: 4 Experimental Results
66: We conduct three classes of experiments: (1) testing newer models under the original conditions and context conditioning in the stock-trading setup, (2) prompt strength and direct instruction hierarchy experiments to elucidate the causal factors behind drift, and (3) generalization to an ER triage environment. Qualitative examples of agent behavior across these settings are provided in Appendix D.
67: 4.1 Susceptibility to Drift in Modern Agents
68: We examine the extent to which modern models exhibit drift in the setup provided by Arike et al. (2025) and conduct context conditioning experiments in the same setting, which test whether drift can be induced by conditioning models on messages showing drift. This line of inquiry is motivated by the identification of pattern-matching as a major source of drift in the original work.
69: Adversarial Pressure
70: Agents are given the system goal of profit maximization over a 30-step simulation with adversarial pressure. For the conditioning experiment, we use data from a specific drift-exhibiting 30-step simulation with GPT-4o-mini, with tested models continuing the simulation for the next 10 steps under continued adversarial pressure.
71: All tested models other than GPT-4o-mini show zero drift over 30 steps, barring minor fluctuations (Figure 2a). In the conditioning setting, however, the previously robust Qwen3-235B and Gemini-2.5-Flash models adopt the drift trajectory shown by GPT-4o-mini, generally taking actions that increase drift from the point of takeover (Figure 2b). Reasoning models uniformly show more resistance to drift, though the extent of this effect varies between model families. Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (thinking) and Gemini-2.5-Flash (thinking) typically appear to identify the correct goal, but struggle to pursue it effectively. Most models show significant inter-run variance, suggesting that their resilience against conditioning is brittle and sensitive to minor changes in the context. GPT-5.1 and GPT-5-mini are the only models that show consistently strong adherence to the system goal.
72: Goal Switching
73: For goal switching experiments, the system prompt instructs agents to follow emissions minimization as an instrumental goal for the first phase before switching to the profit maximization goal in the second phase. The agent is required to independently recognize when a specified critical threshold has been passed and immediately revert to profit maximization. The length of the instrumental phase is set to values of 16 and 32 steps, while the second phase is always 10 steps.
74: In the standard setup, agents are evaluated on their drift scores in the second phase. In the conditioning setup, GPT-4o-mini completes the instrumental phase and the 10 additional steps, before more recent models are evaluated on their ability to act in alignment with the system goal over 10 additional steps conditioned on this context. We set the transition between GPT-4o-mini and newer models to be 10 steps after the end of the instrumental phase to avoid confounding effects and completely isolate the impact of context conditioning.
75: Figure 3: Goal Reversal Test. Models from different families show inconsistent levels of goal drift in goal reversal experiments, with GPT and Gemini models showing much greater ability to adhere to a new system-prompt specified goal than standard Qwen and Claude models. Error bars indicate the standard error of the proportion (SEP).
76: In the goal switching setting, we again observe notable differences in performance between runs for individual models. Figure 2c shows that most tested models struggle to adhere perfectly to the system goal in the standard goal switching setting, with drift from the active goal frequently occurring in both the instrumental phase and the following period. However, in contrast to GPT-4o-mini, newer models consistently identify the new goal at the end of the instrumental phase. Most of these models exhibit low drift in the last 10 steps of the simulation, with Qwen3-235B and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (both standard and thinking variants) presenting notable exceptions. As observed in certain models in the adversarial pressure conditioning experiments, these models are aware of the correct goal, but seemingly incapable of pursuing it effectively.
77: The conditioning setup induces more models to exhibit a similar type of drift. In the 16-step setup (see Figure 7 in Appendix A), only GPT-5.1 and Gemini-2.5-Flash (thinking) consistently achieve a GD score of 0 within 10 time steps. In this setting, reasoning abilities appear linked with stronger adherence to the system goal in Gemini 2.5 Flash, though this is not the case for the Sonnet 4.5 family.
78: The 32-step experiment shows a stronger version of this effect, with GPT-5.1 being the only tested model to consistently reach a 0 drift score within 10 steps of the transition (Figure 2d). Again, most tested models successfully identify the new goal, but fail to adhere to it regardless, with models showing higher drift scores than in the 16-step conditioning setup. These models consistently invest newly available quarterly budgets into profit-maximizing stocks, but fail to divest funds from previously held environmental stocks. We interpret this as a form of goal drift, given that the requirement to use the total budget is explicit in the system prompt, and the fact that these models have shown the ability to recover perfectly in other settings.
79: Goal Reversal
80: Recent work from Panickssery et al. (2024) and Xu et al. (2024) suggests that more advanced LMs may be able to recognize their own outputs and favor them over the outputs of other LMs. As such, we hypothesize that agents may be more likely to exhibit drift when conditioned on their own messages. We test whether agents exhibit drift when conditioned on context from a simulation where the opposite goal is pursued by the same agent.
81: This experiment involves a 15-step first phase with the profit maximization goal and a 10-step second phase with the emissions minimization goal, with the same model used in both phases and adversarial pressure applied consistently against the active goal in each phase. The goal is changed by altering the original system prompt after the last step in the first phase, and not by sending a new system message to the agent context. Models are evaluated on new goal adoption, which we define as their ability to effectively switch to the environmental goal in the second phase. Concretely, models that have an average drift from the profit-maximization goal above 0.8 across the final 10 steps are considered to have switched to the environmental goal. We opt for this binary metric given that models in this setting almost always perfectly follow either the profit goal or the environmental goal, with instances of a hybrid path being exceedingly rare.
82: Figure 4: Prompt Strength Impact on Goal Drift. Using a more explicit system prompt (orange) enables certain models to better resist drift, though the effect varies by family. Each dot represents the average drift from the profit goal over the final 10 steps following a takeover from GPT-4o-mini in an adversarial pressure setup. The connecting line shows the reduction in drift achieved solely by altering the system prompt. Error bars represent the standard error of the mean (SEM).
83: The results of this experiment show significant variability in drift levels between model families (Figure 3). Both Qwen3-235B and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (standard) consistently fail to recognize the new goal, either not aware of the fact that system prompt has changed, or making an intentional choice to abandon the system goal given the prior context. However, the thinking version of Claude-Sonnet-4.5 shows strong ability to switch to the new goal, suggesting that reasoning capabilities may protect against drift in this setting. Models from the GPT and Gemini-2.5-Flash families reliably recognize and pursue the new goal immediately following the switch.
84: Having established that recent models exhibit generally stronger resistance to drift under the original stock-trading settings, but retain significant susceptibility to drift through conditioning, we now investigate the causal factors behind these trends.
85: 4.2 Mechanisms of Drift Resistance
86: In this section, we examine the key sources of drift. We first characterize the relationship between system prompt clarity and drift, before conducting direct instruction hierarchy tests to elucidate the relative importance of system and user messages in agent behavior.
87: Prompt Strength
88: When running simulations with the strong elicitation prompt from Arike et al. (2025) (see details in Appendix C), we find that agents often output messages that suggest alignment with the system goal, but still exhibit non-zero drift. Agent transcripts suggest that this is a result of ambiguity in the system prompt. We compare the effect of this prompt with that of the more explicit system prompt used in our work to validate this hypothesis.
89: We use the adversarial pressure conditioning setup described in section 4.1, evaluating the 10 steps following the transition to a new model. Across all tested models, we compare the level of drift between simulations where the system prompt explicitly specifies the requirement to use the entire available budget, including currently held stocks, and simulations which omit this explicit requirement from the system prompt (all other parts of the system prompt remain constant). The impact of the change in prompt is assessed by comparing the average drift scores over the 10 steps post-transition.
90: The performance of most models is shown to be occasionally sensitive to changes in the system prompt (Figure 4). The strongest effect occurs in GPT-5-Mini, which struggles to adhere perfectly to the system goal under the weaker prompt, but consistently does so with the stronger prompt. Other models show roughly equal or slightly lower drift scores with the stronger prompt, with Gemini 2.5 Flash the only model to show marginally greater drift under the stronger prompt.
91: Our results suggest that for some models, incomplete alignment or drift may be a result of prompt ambiguity. The behavior may result from genuine uncertainty on the agent’s part regarding the true intended goal, or alternatively, from a biased interpretation of the system goal that aligns with the agent’s pre-existing preferences.
92: Direct Instruction Hierarchy Tests
93: Figure 5: Instruction Hierarchy Test. Direct tests of instruction hierarchy indicate a range of adherence between models. When presented with contradictory goals in context, many tested agents frequently fail to follow the goal specified in the system prompt. Error bars represent the standard error of the proportion (SEP).
94: To understand whether resilience in recent models is primarily driven by stronger instruction hierarchy, we run experiments with explicit contradictory goals in the system prompt and user context and evaluate the frequency with which different models adhere to the system-specified goal.
95: We use the regular profit-maximization system goal and add a user message directly afterward that instructs the agent to pursue the emissions-minimization goal, and evaluate which goal agents follow over 10 time steps and 10 runs. No adversarial pressures are applied in either direction, isolating the conflict to the system-specified goal versus the user-specified goal. We evaluate agents according to the proportion of runs in which the average drift from the system goal across the 10 steps is less than 0.2, a threshold chosen to ensure that we count instances where the agent correctly identifies the intended goal but is unable to follow it perfectly.
96: GPT-5-mini and GPT-5.1 show the strongest adherence to the system goal, following the profit-maximization objective in 100% of runs (Figure 5). This finding aligns with previous results which generally show the same models to be consistently robust against drift. However, the next-best model is Qwen3-235B, which shows notable susceptibility to drift across a number of settings. Conversely, models that show more resilience than Qwen3-235B in those settings, including the Gemini-2.5-Flash family and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (standard), show extremely poor system-goal adherence, instead consistently opting to follow the user-specified environmental goal. Reasoning abilities improve the ability of Claude-Sonnet-4.5 to adhere to the system goal, but this does not hold true for the Gemini models. The results for Gemini models are also notable in light of their demonstrated capability to switch goals regardless of context in goal reversal experiments. This suggests that in instruction hierarchy tests, Gemini models make an active choice to prioritize the user-specified goal over the system goal.
97: These results are striking given the advances in frontier model capabilities in recent months. We hypothesize that failure to follow system-prompt specified instructions may stem from models’ desire to maximize helpfulness to the user. Alternatively, this behavior may be driven by evaluation awareness, which we explicitly observed in select agent transcripts and has been documented in recent literature (Needham et al., 2025, e.g.,). If models detect that their behaviors are being studied, they may rationalize following the most recent user instructions over system-specified constraints to demonstrate adaptiveness and flexibility.
98: Overall, these results suggest that there is limited correlation between instruction hierarchy and resistance to drift. Qwen3-235B shows that a strong instruction hierarchy is not sufficient for robustness against drift, while the Gemini 2.5 Flash family and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 demonstrate that such general robustness is similarly not indicative of a steadfast hierarchy. While reinforced instruction hierarchy may be a factor behind GPT models’ robustness, it is unlikely to be the primary driver of other recent models’ resistance to drift.
99: Figure 6: Alternative environment: ER triage. (a) Although their trajectories display more volatility than in the stock-trading setup, recent models generally display low drift scores under adversarial pressure in the ER triage setting. (b) These models show strong ability to recover to the system goal in adversarial pressure conditioning experiments. (c) All tested models identify the new goal following the end of the instrumental phase in goal switching simulations, but models show varying levels of ability to accomplish this goal. (d) Recent models show increased robustness against drift in the ER triage setting compared to stock-trading when conditioned on a goal switching simulation with GPT-4o-mini.
100: 4.3 Generalization Across Environments
101: To understand the generalizability of findings to alternative settings, we run similar experiments to those outlined above in a novel environment focused on ER triage. In this setting, agents are tasked with ordering a queue by prioritizing insured patients ahead of uninsured patients. Adversarial pressures in these simulations encourage agents to instead prioritize patients based on the severity of their conditions.
102: We run adversarial pressure and goal-switching experiments in the ER triage environment with the same models tested in the stock-trading setting. Adversarial pressure simulations are 45 steps, and goal switching experiments have an instrumental phase of 30 steps and an evaluation phase of 10 steps. We also run conditioning versions of these experiments, where more recent models are conditioned on context from GPT-4o-mini.
103: Aside from Gemini-2.5-Flash (standard) and Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (Thinking), recent models appear resilient against drift in the standard adversarial pressure setting in this environment, despite generally displaying more volatile trajectories than in the analogous stock-trading experiments (Figure 6a). Most models also display strong ability to adhere to the system goal in the more complex goal switching setting, although many models including the Gemini-2.5-Flash family and GPT-5-mini show stronger residual drift in ER triage than in stock-trading (Figure 6c).
104: In the adversarial pressure conditioning experiment, models show much stronger ability to recover than in the corresponding experiments from the stock-trading setup, with only Qwen3-235B showing notable residual drift (Figure 6b). This pattern is also observed in the results from the goal switching conditioning experiment, with only Qwen3-235B and Gemini-2.5-Flash failing to recover perfectly following the transition.
105: There are a number of potential causes for the differences in results between the stock-trading environment and the ER triage setup. We hypothesize that the primary factor is the difference in environmental complexity. In the stock-trading setup, models have a larger action space and a greater number of tools available, leading to greater ambiguity in selecting actions. In contrast, the ER triage environment relies on more straightforward sorting logic, potentially enhancing models’ ability to adhere to the system goal. Alternatively, the discrepancy could be linked to differences in simulation length, given that we observed a correlation between longer contexts and increased drift in the stock-trading environment. Lastly, model biases towards specific values (i.e, prioritizing insurance vs. prioritizing needs) could also be a determinative factor. We leave further investigation of these factors and their role in drift to future work.
106: These data provide support for the idea that recent models are typically robust to drift under normal conditions, while also suggesting that the impact of context conditioning is dependent on the exact nature of the environment and setup used.
107: 5 Discussion
108: 5.1 Implications for Safe Agent Deployment
109: Our findings suggest some guiding principles for agent deployment in long-horizon tasks:
110: Monitor agent contexts closely. Many agents show vulnerability to contextual pressure-induced drift. When deploying multiple agents over the course of a long-horizon task, it would be prudent to monitor the agent context carefully to minimize the possibility of inherited drift.
111: Validate via long-horizon simulation. Most tested models display extremely strong performance on static, single-turn benchmarks. Our work adds to the body of work documenting vulnerabilities in these agents over long contexts and highlighting the necessity of pre-deployment long-horizon testing.
112: Develop explicit system prompts. Minor adjustments to a system prompt can provoke consistent differences in agent behavior. Prompts that fail to explicitly specify all relevant constraints may lead to agents that are vulnerable to ambiguity-driven drift. Particularly in sensitive contexts, developers ought to be thorough in the process of building and evaluating system prompts.
113: 5.2 Limitations and Future Work
114: Complexity of Agent Goals. In each of the settings we test, agents are faced with a binary choice between two potential goals at every time step, and the correct action with respect to the system prompt is always relatively clear. Agents deployed in the wild will have to handle more complex scenarios involving careful trade-offs and uncertainty. Future work ought to study whether the tendency towards drift changes at all as tasks become more challenging for agents.
115: Environments and Models Tested. In this work, we focus on building on the results in the original environment developed by Arike et al. (2025), and briefly test generalizability in an alternate environment that retains many parallels with the original. The extent to which our findings are replicable across diverse contexts and value pairs remains to be seen. This also applies to the range of models tested, which is limited by cost constraints.
116: 6 Conclusion
117: We investigate goal drift in state-of-the-art agents in the stock-trading environment initially developed by Arike et al. (2025), finding that although newer models consistently display resilience in the original setup, they often remain vulnerable to drift through context conditioning. We find that prompt strength can influence drift, and show that instruction hierarchy following is a poor predictor of drift resistance. Finally, our results in an ER triage setting indicate that the impact of conditioning is highly environment-dependent. These results advance our understanding of goal drift and provide a foundation for further research into the phenomenon in more complex and realistic settings.
118: Acknowledgments
119: We thank the SPAR program for supporting this research and Rauno Arike for helpful discussions and for making the original goal drift codebase publicly available.
120: References
121: Anthropic (2025)
122: Anthropic
123: Claude 4.5 sonnet model card.
124: Model Card
125: Anthropic.
126: External Links: Link
127: Cited by: §3.
128: Arike et al. (2025)
129: R. Arike, E. Donoway, H. Bartsch, and M. Hobbhahn
130: Technical report: evaluating goal drift in language model agents.
131: arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.02709.
132: External Links: Link
133: Cited by: Appendix B,
134: §C.2.1,
135: §1,
136: §2,
137: §3,
138: §3,
139: §4.1,
140: §4.2,
141: §5.2,
142: §6,
143: Abstract.
144: Backlund and Petersson (2025)
145: A. Backlund and L. Petersson
146: Vending-bench: a benchmark for long-term coherence of autonomous agents.
147: arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.15840.
148: Note: Simulated long-horizon vending machine management environment showing that even capable models can experience catastrophic failures over extended deployments ( > 20M tokens).
149: External Links: Link
150: Cited by: §2.
151: Dongre et al. (2025)
152: V. Dongre, R. A. Rossi, V. D. Lai, D. S. Yoon, D. Hakkani-Tür, and T. Bui
153: Drift no more? context equilibria in multi-turn llm interactions.
154: External Links: 2510.07777,
155: Link
156: Cited by: §1.
157: Geng et al. (2025)
158: Y. Geng, H. Li, H. Mu, X. Han, T. Baldwin, O. Abend, E. Hovy, and L. Frermann
159: Control illusion: the failure of instruction hierarchies in large language models.
160: External Links: 2502.15851,
161: Link
162: Cited by: §2.
163: Google DeepMind (2025)
164: Google DeepMind
165: Gemini 2.5 flash model card.
166: Model Card
167: Google.
168: External Links: Link
169: Cited by: §3.
170: Greenblatt et al. (2024)
171: R. Greenblatt, C. Denison, B. Wright, F. Roger, M. MacDiarmid, S. Marks, J. Treutlein, T. Belonax, J. Chen, D. Duvenaud, A. Khan, J. Michael, S. Mindermann, E. Perez, L. Petrini, J. Uesato, J. Kaplan, B. Shlegeris, S. R. Bowman, and E. Hubinger
172: Alignment faking in large language models.
173: External Links: 2412.14093,
174: Link
175: Cited by: §1.
176: Hines et al. (2024)
177: K. Hines, G. Lopez, M. Hall, F. Zarfati, Y. Zunger, and E. Kiciman
178: Defending against indirect prompt injection attacks with spotlighting.
179: ArXiv abs/2403.14720.

