http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04002v3
AgriGPT-VL: Agricultural Vision-Language Understanding Suite
2025-10-05T02:30:11Z
2025-12-07T17:46:22Z
Despite rapid advances in multimodal large language models, agricultural applications remain constrained by the scarcity of domain-tailored models, curated vision-language corpora, and rigorous evaluation. To address these challenges, we present the AgriGPT-VL Suite, a unified multimodal framework for agriculture. Our contributions are threefold. First, we introduce Agri-3M-VL, the largest vision-language corpus for agriculture to our knowledge, curated by a scalable multi-agent data generator; it comprises 1M image-caption pairs, 2M image-grounded VQA pairs, 50K expert-level VQA instances, and 15K GRPO reinforcement learning samples. Second, we develop AgriGPT-VL, an agriculture-specialized vision-language model trained via a progressive curriculum of textual grounding, multimodal shallow/deep alignment, and GRPO refinement. This method achieves strong multimodal reasoning while preserving text-only capability. Third, we establish AgriBench-VL-4K, a compact yet challenging evaluation suite with open-ended and image-grounded questions, paired with multi-metric evaluation and an LLM-as-a-judge framework. Experiments show that AgriGPT-VL outperforms leading general-purpose VLMs on AgriBench-VL-4K, achieving higher pairwise win rates in the LLM-as-a-judge evaluation. Meanwhile, it remains competitive on the text-only AgriBench-13K with no noticeable degradation of language ability. Ablation studies further confirm consistent gains from our alignment and GRPO refinement stages. We will open source all of the resources to support reproducible research and deployment in low-resource agricultural settings.

http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04020v3
Spatiotemporal Forecasting as Planning: A Model-Based Reinforcement Learning Approach with Generative World Models
2025-10-05T03:57:38Z
2025-10-10T02:54:02Z
To address the dual challenges of inherent stochasticity and non-differentiable metrics in physical spatiotemporal forecasting, we propose Spatiotemporal Forecasting as Planning (SFP), a new paradigm grounded in Model-Based Reinforcement Learning. SFP constructs a novel Generative World Model to simulate diverse, high-fidelity future states, enabling an "imagination-based" environmental simulation. Within this framework, a base forecasting model acts as an agent, guided by a beam search-based planning algorithm that leverages non-differentiable domain metrics as reward signals to explore high-return future sequences. These identified high-reward candidates then serve as pseudo-labels to continuously optimize the agent's policy through iterative self-training, significantly reducing prediction error and demonstrating exceptional performance on critical domain metrics like capturing extreme events.

http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04041v1
SITCOM: Scaling Inference-Time COMpute for VLAs
2025-10-05T05:24:08Z
2025-10-05T05:24:08Z
Learning robust robotic control policies remains a major challenge due to the high cost of collecting labeled data, limited generalization to unseen environments, and difficulties in planning over long horizons. While Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models offer a promising solution by grounding natural language instructions into single-step control commands, they often lack mechanisms for lookahead and struggle with compounding errors in dynamic tasks. In this project, we introduce Scaling Inference-Time COMpute for VLAs (SITCOM), a framework that augments any pretrained VLA with model-based rollouts and reward-based trajectory selection, inspired by Model Predictive Control algorithm. SITCOM leverages a learned dynamics model to simulate multi-step action rollouts to select the best candidate plan for real-world execution, transforming one-shot VLAs into robust long-horizon planners. We develop an efficient transformer-based dynamics model trained on large-scale BridgeV2 data and fine-tuned on SIMPLER environments to bridge the Real2Sim gap, and score candidate rollouts using rewards from simulator. Through comprehensive evaluation across multiple tasks and settings in the SIMPLER environment, we demonstrate that SITCOM when combined with a good reward function can significantly improve task completion rate from 48% to 72% using trained dynamics model.

http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04058v4
Unlearning in Diffusion models under Data Constraints: A Variational Inference Approach
2025-10-05T06:39:30Z
2026-03-23T04:07:49Z
For a responsible and safe deployment of diffusion models in various domains, regulating the generated outputs from these models is desirable because such models could generate undesired, violent, and obscene outputs. To tackle this problem, recent works use machine unlearning methodology to forget training data points containing these undesired features from pre-trained generative models. However, these methods proved to be ineffective in data-constrained settings where the whole training dataset is inaccessible. Thus, the principal objective of this work is to propose a machine unlearning methodology that can prevent the generation of outputs containing undesired features from a pre-trained diffusion model in such a data-constrained setting. Our proposed method, termed as Variational Diffusion Unlearning (VDU), is a computationally efficient method that only requires access to a subset of training data containing undesired features. Our approach is inspired by the variational inference framework with the objective of minimizing a loss function consisting of two terms: plasticity inducer and stability regularizer. Plasticity inducer reduces the log-likelihood of the undesired training data points, while the stability regularizer, essential for preventing loss of image generation quality, regularizes the model in parameter space. We validate the effectiveness of our method through comprehensive experiments for both class unlearning and feature unlearning. For class unlearning, we unlearn some user-identified classes from MNIST, CIFAR-10, and tinyImageNet datasets from a pre-trained unconditional denoising diffusion probabilistic model (DDPM). Similarly, for feature unlearning, we unlearn the generation of certain high-level features from a pre-trained Stable Diffusion model trained on LAION-5B dataset.

http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04145v1
Automating construction safety inspections using a multi-modal vision-language RAG framework
2025-10-05T10:48:54Z
2025-10-05T10:48:54Z
Conventional construction safety inspection methods are often inefficient as they require navigating through large volume of information. Recent advances in large vision-language models (LVLMs) provide opportunities to automate safety inspections through enhanced visual and linguistic understanding. However, existing applications face limitations including irrelevant or unspecific responses, restricted modal inputs and hallucinations. Utilisation of Large Language Models (LLMs) for this purpose is constrained by availability of training data and frequently lack real-time adaptability. This study introduces SiteShield, a multi-modal LVLM-based Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) framework for automating construction safety inspection reports by integrating visual and audio inputs. Using real-world data, SiteShield outperformed unimodal LLMs without RAG with an F1 score of 0.82, hamming loss of 0.04, precision of 0.76, and recall of 0.96. The findings indicate that SiteShield offers a novel pathway to enhance information retrieval and efficiency in generating safety reports.

http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04234v1
Flexible Locomotion Learning with Diffusion Model Predictive Control
2025-10-05T14:51:13Z
2025-10-05T14:51:13Z
Legged locomotion demands controllers that are both robust and adaptable, while remaining compatible with task and safety considerations. However, model-free reinforcement learning (RL) methods often yield a fixed policy that can be difficult to adapt to new behaviors at test time. In contrast, Model Predictive Control (MPC) provides a natural approach to flexible behavior synthesis by incorporating different objectives and constraints directly into its optimization process. However, classical MPC relies on accurate dynamics models, which are often difficult to obtain in complex environments and typically require simplifying assumptions. We present Diffusion-MPC, which leverages a learned generative diffusion model as an approximate dynamics prior for planning, enabling flexible test-time adaptation through reward and constraint based optimization. Diffusion-MPC jointly predicts future states and actions; at each reverse step, we incorporate reward planning and impose constraint projection, yielding trajectories that satisfy task objectives while remaining within physical limits. To obtain a planning model that adapts beyond imitation pretraining, we introduce an interactive training algorithm for diffusion based planner: we execute our reward-and-constraint planner in environment, then filter and reweight the collected trajectories by their realized returns before updating the denoiser. Our design enables strong test-time adaptability, allowing the planner to adjust to new reward specifications without retraining. We validate Diffusion-MPC on real world, demonstrating strong locomotion and flexible adaptation.

http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04246v1
ContextVLA: Vision-Language-Action Model with Amortized Multi-Frame Context
2025-10-05T15:29:57Z
2025-10-05T15:29:57Z
Leveraging temporal context is crucial for success in partially observable robotic tasks. However, prior work in behavior cloning has demonstrated inconsistent performance gains when using multi-frame observations. In this paper, we introduce ContextVLA, a policy model that robustly improves robotic task performance by effectively leveraging multi-frame observations. Our approach is motivated by the key observation that Vision-Language-Action models (VLA), i.e., policy models built upon a Vision-Language Model (VLM), more effectively utilize multi-frame observations for action generation. This suggests that VLMs' inherent temporal understanding capability enables them to extract more meaningful context from multi-frame observations. However, the high dimensionality of video inputs introduces significant computational overhead, making VLA training and inference inefficient. To address this, ContextVLA compresses past observations into a single context token, allowing the policy to efficiently leverage temporal context for action generation. Our experiments show that ContextVLA consistently improves over single-frame VLAs and achieves the benefits of full multi-frame training but with reduced training and inference times.

http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04365v1
Diffusion^2: Dual Diffusion Model with Uncertainty-Aware Adaptive Noise for Momentary Trajectory Prediction
2025-10-05T21:19:33Z
2025-10-05T21:19:33Z
Accurate pedestrian trajectory prediction is crucial for ensuring safety and efficiency in autonomous driving and human-robot interaction scenarios. Earlier studies primarily utilized sufficient observational data to predict future trajectories. However, in real-world scenarios, such as pedestrians suddenly emerging from blind spots, sufficient observational data is often unavailable (i.e. momentary trajectory), making accurate prediction challenging and increasing the risk of traffic accidents. Therefore, advancing research on pedestrian trajectory prediction under extreme scenarios is critical for enhancing traffic safety. In this work, we propose a novel framework termed Diffusion^2, tailored for momentary trajectory prediction. Diffusion^2 consists of two sequentially connected diffusion models: one for backward prediction, which generates unobserved historical trajectories, and the other for forward prediction, which forecasts future trajectories. Given that the generated unobserved historical trajectories may introduce additional noise, we propose a dual-head parameterization mechanism to estimate their aleatoric uncertainty and design a temporally adaptive noise module that dynamically modulates the noise scale in the forward diffusion process. Empirically, Diffusion^2 sets a new state-of-the-art in momentary trajectory prediction on ETH/UCY and Stanford Drone datasets.

