Teaching LLM to be Persuasive: Reward-Enhanced Policy Optimization for Alignment from Heterogeneous Rewards
Report GitHub Issue
×
Title:
Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
Description:
Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub
arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×
Back to arXiv
Why HTML?
Report Issue
Back to Abstract
Download PDF
Abstract
1 Introduction
2 Related Work
Task-Oriented Dialogue System and LLM Alignment
Controllable text generation and Multi-Reward Aggregation
3 Task Definition and Challenges
4 Methodology
Reward design
Reward enhancement
Effective computation
5 Experimental Setup
Training data
Evaluation data
Baselines
6 Results
Online Samples
Badcase
Collection
7 Analysis and Discussion
7.1 Emergent Negotiation Capabilities During Training
7.2 Fine-grained Conversational Skills Evaluation
8 Conclusions
References
A Preference Data Examples
B Task challenges and REPO solutions.
C Prompts
D Examples of Emergent Negotiation Skills
E Annotator Instructions
License: arXiv.org perpetual non-exclusive license
arXiv:2510.04214v1 [cs.CL] 05 Oct 2025
Teaching LLM to be Persuasive: Reward-Enhanced Policy Optimization for Alignment from Heterogeneous Rewards
Zhuoran Zhuang
Ye Chen
Xia Zeng*
Chao Luo
Luhui Liu
Yihan Chen
Affiliation: Fliggy Alibaba
Abstract
We study deploying large language models (LLMs) as business development (BD) agents for persuasive price negotiation in online travel agencies (OTAs), where aligning traveler affordability and hotel profitability directly affects bookings, partner relationships, and access to travel. The agent must follow a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) while conducting multi-turn persuasion, interpreting colloquial inputs, and adhering to guardrails (no over-promising, no hallucinations). Conventional post-training—supervised fine-tuning (SFT) or single-source reward optimization—overfits scripts, misses nuanced persuasive style, and fails to enforce verifiable business constraints.
We propose Reward-Enhanced Policy Optimization (REPO), a reinforcement learning post-training framework that aligns an LLM with heterogeneous rewards: a preference-trained reward model (RM) for dense human alignment, an reward judge (RJ) for high-level persuasive behavior and SOP compliance, and programmatic reward functions (RF) for deterministic checks on numerics, formatting, and guardrails. A straightforward enhancement mechanism is proposed to combine the RM with RJ/RF signals to curb reward hacking and improve negotiation quality. In production-style evaluations— ~150 turns from real dialogues and ~ 225 turns from curated bad-case dialogues —REPO lifts average dialogue rating to 4.63: +1.20 over base, +0.83 over Direct Preference Optimization (DPO); +0.33 over Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO), increases the share of conversations with at least one excellent reponse to 66.67% (+23.34 pp over GRPO), and achieves a 93.33% bad-case fix rate with 75.56% clean fixes, outperforming SFT, DPO, PPO, and GRPO. We also observe emergent capabilities—proactive empathy, localized reasoning, calibrated tactics—that surpass gold annotations.
Figure 1: Framework of REPO for Alignment from Heterogeneous Reward Signals. Given a query (qq), the Policy Model generates an output (oo), which is evaluated through three reward components: the Reward Model (RM), providing a dense, human preference-aligned signal; the Reward Judge (RJ), an LLM-based evaluator scoring nuanced, high-level behaviors; and programmatic Reward Functions (RF), validating task-specific requirements with deterministic checks. These signals are combined to compute the total reward (rr), used to guide learning via Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) to calculate the Advantage (AA). The Value Model predicts the state value (vv) to further refine the training process.
Figure 2: Simplified SOP for the Price Negotiation Task.
1 Introduction
Proactive price negotiation is a key operational challenge for business development (BD) in online travel agencies (OTAs). In these systems, a BD agent must conduct multi-turn dialogues with hotel managers, aiming to balance user affordability and hotel profitability. Effective negotiation directly impacts room bookings, partner relationships, and overall access to cost-friendly travel. However, this process requires not only persuasive dialogue skills but also precise adherence to task-specific business rules (such as no over-promising or hallucinated offers). The complexity of these interactions—spanning colloquial input understanding, multi-turn reasoning, numeric validation, and procedural compliance—renders conventional task-oriented dialogue systems insufficient.
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated significant advancements in task-oriented dialogue systems, improving upon traditional rule-based or modular approaches by introducing greater naturalness and generalization capabilities (Ouyang et al., 2022; Zhao et al., 2025). While existing studies primarily focus on reactive, user-initiated tasks like question answering, proactive price negotiation involves long-horizon persuasion requiring both strict adherence to business rules and nuanced decision-making (Krumdick et al., 2025; Feng et al., 2025). This problem presents several new challenges that go beyond the capabilities of conventional post-training approaches:
•
Negotiation complexity: The agent must negotiate rates persuasively without damaging hotel partnerships and ensure a win–win outcome for both users and hoteliers. Such tasks require a nuanced understanding of context and competitor behaviors, along with human-like negotiation tactics (Rogiers et al., 2024).
•
Stageful process adherence and constraints: Prices and discounts must follow long and complex multi-stage standard operating procedures (SOPs). Agents must infer the current negotiation stage from dialogue history and respond with appropriate actions specific to that stage (Wang et al., 2025).
•
Verifiable numerics and guardrails: Outputs must meet deterministic business requirements, such as accurate pricing, valid formats, and strict adherence to guardrail rules (e.g., no hallucinated business relationships or over-promising) (Shao et al., 2024).
•
Persuasive capabilities in adversarial scenarios: Adversarial or edge-case scenarios, such as resistance to rate adjustments or misaligned incentives, require adaptive strategies for resolving conflicts while maintaining consistency and empathy (Zheng et al., 2025).
While supervised fine-tuning (SFT) and Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) offer steady improvements by aligning models to labeled examples (Rafailov et al., 2024), they inevitably struggle to generalize beyond their training data. Methods like Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) and Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) extend alignment through reinforcement learning (Ouyang et al., 2022; Shao et al., 2024), but these approaches are limited by unstable training dynamics and vulnerability to "reward hacking" when relying on single-source signals (Zheng et al., 2025).
To address these challenges, we propose Reward-Enhanced Policy Optimization (REPO), a novel reinforcement-driven framework designed to align LLMs with the multi-faceted requirements of OTA price negotiations. REPO combines three complementary reward sources:
•
Preference-trained reward models (RM): capturing dense human-aligned preferences to ensure persuasive style and human-like interaction (Ouyang et al., 2022).
•
LLM-as-a-judge Reward Judge (RJ): evaluating high-level behaviors, such as SOP compliance, emotional value, and effectiveness in multi-turn persuasion (Krumdick et al., 2025; Zheng et al., 2023).
•
Programmatic reward functions (RF): enforcing deterministic checks on numeric accuracy, task-specific formatting, and adherence to safety guardrails (Shao et al., 2024).
Our framework combines these heterogeneous signals through a stability-preserving modulation strategy, enhancing the core RM signal with auxiliary feedback from RJ and RF to reduce reward hacking and ensure consistent, reliable learning. REPO further adopts practical training optimizations such as LoRA for efficient fine-tuning (Hu et al., 2021) and avoids reference models or excessive group computations for scalability, making it feasible under real-world constraints.
In empirical evaluations against strong baselines, including SFT, DPO(Rafailov et al., 2024), PPO (Ouyang et al., 2022), and GRPO (Shao et al., 2024), REPO achieves state-of-the-art performance on multi-turn dialogue qualities and bad-case fix rates. Beyond top-line metrics, REPO exhibits emergent capabilities such as proactive empathy, localized reasoning, and calibrated negotiation strategies, surpassing gold-standard human annotations.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1.
An extensive study of LLMs for industrial-scale price negotiation tasks, addressing complex, long-horizon persuasion scenarios beyond conventional question-answering tasks.
2.
The development of REPO, the first framework to aggregate preference, judge, and programmatic rewards for alignment in complex task-oriented dialogues.
3.
In-depth evaluations that demonstrate REPO’s superiority over competitive baselines, with evidence of its ability to improve negotiation effectiveness, compliance, and emergent persuasive capabilities that surpass human-annotated gold standards.
2 Related Work
Task-Oriented Dialogue System and LLM Alignment
Task-oriented dialogue (TOD) systems enable goal-directed interactions in structured settings such as booking, reservations, and service automation. Recent advancements in large language models (LLMs) have improved fluency, coverage, and generalization in TODs (Zhao et al., 2025; Yi et al., 2025). However, most prior research focuses on reactive, user-initiated tasks (Feng et al., 2025). Proactive price negotiation, where the agent must drive multi-turn dialogues to achieve strategic outcomes while adhering to strict business constraints, presents unique challenges. First, the agent must manage long-horizon persuasion strategies, combining context-based reasoning with calibrated emotional intelligence, to balance competing interests like traveler affordability and hotel profitability. Second, it must operate under rigid Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs), ensuring compliance with task-specific constraints, such as avoiding over-promising or hallucinated offers. Third, adherence to verifiable business numerics and guardrails, including precise price setting and valid formats, must be ensured without sacrificing dialogue fluency and persuasiveness. While some progress has been made towards goal-driven persuasion (Rogiers et al., 2024), addressing the coupling of procedural adherence, dialogical nuance, and heterogeneous constraints in complex, real-world negotiations remains underexplored.
Traditional approaches to aligning LLMs for task-oriented dialogues center on supervised fine-tuning (SFT) on labeled datasets. While effective for mimicking patterns present in the data, SFT often suffers from limited generalization when tasked with scenarios outside the training data distribution. Reinforcement Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) introduced optimization against preference-trained reward models as a way to embed nuanced human alignment into LLMs (Ouyang et al., 2022). However, RLHF is prone to reward hacking and instability, particularly in tasks like negotiation that require balancing multiple competing objectives over long conversational horizons. Recent alternatives like Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) improve training stability via a non-RL pairwise preference objective (Rafailov et al., 2024); however, these methods still rely heavily on the quality and scope of preference data and lack mechanisms to enforce adherence to structured business rules or formatting requirements. Addressing these challenges requires new frameworks capable of seamlessly integrating expressive alignment signals with deterministic process constraints to ensure reliability in applications like proactive negotiation.
Controllable text generation and Multi-Reward Aggregation
Controllable text generation (CTG) has gained attention for directing LLM outputs to conform to specific constraints, such as style, safety, sentiment, and task-specific requirements, without degrading language quality (Liang et al., 2024). Recent CTG frameworks span a wide range of training-stage strategies—such as SFT, reinforcement learning, and task-adaptive fine-tuning—as well as inference-time approaches, including guided decoding and retrieval-enhanced generation. While suitable for general content generation tasks, these methods encounter significant limitations in complex domains such as OTA price negotiation. Specifically, these techniques lack a systematic mechanism to simultaneously fulfill heterogeneous constraints, such as managing multi-turn responses, enforcing deterministic guardrails, and achieving effective persuasion while maintaining fluency.
Post-training alignment methods have explored diverse reward aggregation techniques. Preference-trained reward models (RMs) are widely used to score outputs based on human-labeled preferences (Ouyang et al., 2022). Evaluative methods such as LLM-as-a-judge frameworks use a task-specific rubric to assess high-level behaviors, such as persuasiveness, safety, and compliance (Zheng et al., 2023). Programmatic reward functions (RFs) have also been developed to enforce deterministic properties such as numerical accuracy, formatting, or adherence to structural constraints (Shao et al., 2024). However, current methods either rely on single-source signals or only combine a subset of these rewards, limiting their effectiveness on tasks where capturing behavior, process compliance, and verifiable outputs is critical. Efforts to aggregate multiple signals via direct reward addition (Wang et al., 2024), multi-objective RL (Jafari et al., 2024), or reward-agent frameworks (Peng et al., 2025) have shown promise, but remain fragile to reward misalignment, unstable training, and suboptimal combination strategies.
REPO is the first approach to jointly combine all three signal families—preference-trained reward models (RMs), LLM-as-a-judge reward judge (RJ), and programmatic reward functions (RF)—into a unified reinforcement learning framework. The key innovation in REPO lies in its stability-preserving modulation mechanism, which enhances the primary RM signal with auxiliary feedback from RJ and RF. This allows REPO to address the challenges of OTA price negotiation by aligning the LLM to generate persuasive, process-adherent, and human-like responses. By leveraging its heterogeneous reward design, REPO achieves robust learning outcomes while mitigating common issues such as overfitting, reward hacking, and lack of compliance in multi-turn task-oriented dialogues.
3 Task Definition and Challenges
Proactive price negotiation in online travel agencies (OTAs) is a complex task where a business development (BD) agent interacts with hotels to adjust room pricing based on market conditions. The ultimate goal is to balance traveler affordability and hotel profitability—a critical factor influencing room bookings, customer satisfaction, and partner relationships. Achieving these outcomes requires striking a delicate balance: lowering rates to improve accessibility for travelers while ensuring hotel partners maintain profitability. The BD agent must negotiate within reasonable limits to secure win–win solutions, where reduced room rates drive higher booking volumes, improving both hotel revenues and user experiences. A Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) governs the negotiation flow; Figure 2 shows a simplified representation of the multi-stage process.
Deploying large language models (LLMs) as BD agents in this negotiation domain presents several challenges that highlight gaps in current task-oriented dialogue systems and alignment methods:
•
Negotiation complexity. Price negotiation requires nuanced, context-aware reasoning and persuasive interaction. The BD agent must tailor responses to address a variety of hotel behaviors, including reluctance to adjust rates and conflicting business priorities. Effective negotiation strategies involve calibrated concessions, competitor comparisons, empathetic framing, and clear communication, all while avoiding actions that could harm long-term hotel partnerships.
•
Stageful process adherence and context awareness. Negotiations involve multi-stage processes dictated by the SOP. At each stage, the BD agent must infer the current state from the dialogue history and act accordingly by selecting state-appropriate responses within specific procedural constraints. The dynamic nature of this task makes reasoning about context and procedural adherence a critical challenge.
•
Verifiable numerics and guardrails. Outputs generated by the BD agent must adhere to strict business constraints. These include accurate numeric reasoning, valid price formatting, and avoidance of unsupported claims such as unrealistic promises (e.g., guaranteed order increases) or the hallucination of business relationships. Violations of safety, formatting, or content guardrails can negatively impact trust in the OTA platform and damage hotel partnerships.
•
Persuasive and adaptive response generation. The BD agent must sustain engaging, fluent, and human-like interactions while adapting to various scenarios, including edge cases. This requires handling vague or off-process inputs, reframing counterarguments persuasively, and responding empathetically to pushback, all while maintaining alignment with the broader goals of negotiation.
The OTA price negotiation task combines hard constraints (e.g., process adherence, numeric accuracy, and safety guardrails) with soft constraints (e.g., persuasive style and emotional value) to support human-like negotiations adhering to a complex Standard Operating Procedure. These negotiations occur over long conversational horizons, requiring dynamic inference of the current stage and appropriate action selection. Furthermore, the task demands adaptive responses suitable for a diverse range of scenarios, including both cooperative and adversarial interactions. These unique challenges illustrate the limitations of conventional methods like SFT and single-source reward optimization, which struggle to generalize to the multifaceted nature of this domain. These limitations drive the design of the REPO framework, which integrates heterogeneous reward signals to support persuasive, compliant, and task-adherent LLM behavior.
4 Methodology
As illustrated in Figure 1, we introduce REPO, a reinforcement learning post-training framework that aligns an LLM using heterogeneous reward signals. Beyond a conventional preference-trained reward model (RM), REPO integrates two complementary channels: a reward judge (RJ), which employs an LLM-as-a-judge, and programmatic reward functions (RF). Each source primarily addresses a different facet of the task—RM provides dense, scalable human preference alignment; RJ evaluates nuanced, high-level behaviors (emotional value, persuasive style, SOP compliance); and RF delivers verifiable checks on business numerics, formatting, and guardrails. In our complex, multi-stage negotiation setting, combining all three is essential: each excels in distinct use cases, and several challenging capabilities only emerge when the model learns from multi-source signals.
Reward design
Table 2 (Appendix) summarizes task challenges and REPO solution reward sources; Table 3 (Appendix) provides the judge prompt. We use three signals:
- Reward model (RM): preference model trained on curated pairwise data; the primary dense signal for quality and alignment, essential for learning human BD persuasion style and tactics.
- Reward judge (RJ): LLM evaluator with a task-specific rubric scoring style, emotional value, SOP compliance, and progress; additive penalties improve consistency. It mitigates reward hacking and enables rapid iteration by updating the judge prompt without changing preference data.
- Reward function (RF): deterministic checks for business numerics, formatting, guardrails, and length; fast and auditable, supporting verifiable requirements with minimal changes.
Reward enhancement
At the core of REPO is a straightforward, stability-preserving modulation scheme: auxiliary signals from the LLM-as-a-judge (RJ) and programmatic reward functions (RF) act as helping scores that scale the primary preference reward model (RM). We aggregate and clip the auxiliary signals, interpret them as a scaling term, and apply them multiplicatively to the RM:
Eenh=clip⁡(Ejudge+Efunc,−n,n),E_{\mathrm{enh}}\;=\;\operatorname{clip}\!\bigl(E_{\mathrm{judge}}+E_{\mathrm{func}},\,-n,\,n\bigr),
Rtotal=Rmodel​(1+Eenhn).R_{\mathrm{total}}\;=\;R_{\mathrm{model}}\,\Bigl(1+\frac{E_{\mathrm{enh}}}{n}\Bigr).
This sign-aware, magnitude-sensitive scaling has the following effects:
•
When Rmodel>0R_{\mathrm{model}}>0:
–
If Eenh>0E_{\mathrm{enh}}>0, the reward is amplified.
–
If Eenh<0E_{\mathrm{enh}}<0, the reward is dampened.
•
When Rmodel<0R_{\mathrm{model}}<0:
–
If Eenh>0E_{\mathrm{enh}}>0, the penalty is reduced.
–
If Eenh<0E_{\mathrm{enh}}<0, the penalty is amplified.
In the special case where Rmodel=0R_{\mathrm{model}}=0 or Eenh=0E_{\mathrm{enh}}=0, RtotalR_{\mathrm{total}} remains 0.
Clipping EenhE_{\mathrm{enh}} to [−n,n][-n,n] provides controlled amplification with stability. We set n to 100 in our experiments.
Effective computation
Given limited compute, REPO uses three techniques to reduce cost relative to standard PPO:
- LoRA adapters on both policy and value networks to cut memory and speed training while maintaining performance.
- No reference model or KL penalty; LoRA’s low-rank constraint supports stable updates without an explicit KL term.
- No group computation; we avoid group-based scoring/aggregation and compute rewards per trajectory.
These choices preserve stability and enable efficient training under tight resource budgets.
Figure 3: Summary of Model Performance Comparison.
Figure 4: Learning Curve of Negotiation Persuasion Capability.
5 Experimental Setup
We conduct all experiments with the Qwen3-32B-Instruct model (Yang et al., 2025). We set the maximum response length to 512 tokens, batch size to 128, LoRA rank r=64 with LoRA alpha=64, learning rate to 1e-6, and warmup steps to 2. Please see the prompt in Table 4 in Appendix. For PPO, we use PPO epochs=10 (number of optimization passes per update). The supervised phase trains with SFT and DPO for 10 epochs, and the RL phase trains with PPO, GRPO 11
1
For GRPO, we set the group size n=3. We ran experiments with and without a reference model; training with a reference model failed to learn and yielded substantially lower performance, so we report results without a reference model., and REPO for 2 epochs each. We report results from the best-performing checkpoint.
Training data
Through iterative annotation with diverse expertise, we built a high-quality preference dataset of 6,632 samples. It includes 252 cases collected from online production by business experts; 3,178 samples annotated by language experts; 3,178 annotated by task experts (human BDs）; and 1,991 initially labeled as SFT (covering full SOP paths) and later enriched into preference data by human BDs. Examples are shown in Table 1.
Evaluation data
We use two sets: (1) Online samples—30 complete production conversations (approximately 150 turns) reflecting the real distribution of hotel intents; and (2) Bad-case collection—45 conversations (approximately 225 turns) curated by business experts to cover diverse issues observed in deployment where the previous base model, Qwen2.5-32B (Qwen et al., 2025), made errors.
Baselines
We compare against common post-training approaches: SFT, DPO, and RL (PPO, GRPO). SFT is simple and stable but capped by supervised data quality and often struggles to generalize. DPO aligns with preference data and is reliable and compute-efficient, yet its ceiling remains data-limited—improvements mainly come from better preference datasets. RL offers a higher ceiling, enabling policies to surpass training exemplars and generalize more strongly; we use PPO and GRPO as representative, widely used algorithms.
6 Results
All results are summarized in Figure 3, which contains three subfigures: (a) overall dialogue rating, (b) percentage of excellent responses, and (c) bad-case fix rate. All evaluations in this section is conducted and agreed by a task expert, a linguist and a computer scientist.
Online Samples
We evaluate the online set using two metrics shown in Figure 3(a)–(b): (i) overall dialogue rating on a 1–5 rubric 1 = unusable, 2 = major issues, 3 = minor issues, 4 = no issues, 5 = excellent; and (ii) percentage of excellent responses—per conversation, counted if the model produces at least one outstanding negotiation turn.
Across both metrics, REPO decisively leads. On the dialogue-quality scale (Figure 3(a)), REPO reaches 4.63, improving by +1.20 over the base (3.43), +0.83 over DPO (3.80), and +0.33 over GRPO (4.30). On excellent-response conversations (Figure 3(b)), REPO attains 66.67%, a fivefold increase over the base (13.33%), roughly double DPO (33.33%), and +23.34 pp over GRPO (43.33%). SFT and DPO deliver steady gains, while vanilla PPO degrades both metrics (rating: 3.33 vs. 3.43; excellent: 10.00% vs. 13.33
Overall, performance improves as alignment signals and optimization become more effective: GRPO yields substantial gains, and REPO’s tri-source alignment (RM + RJ + RF with enhancement) delivers the largest uplift in both average dialogue rating and the incidence of excellent negotiation turns.
Badcase
Collection
We assess fixes across five outcomes (solved, solved with minor/major problem, unsolved, unsolved with major problem) and define fix rate as the sum of the three “solved” categories. Top-line fix rates: REPO, DPO, SFT 93.33%; PPO 86.66%; GRPO 71.10%. Residual unresolved rates: REPO/SFT 6.67%, DPO 6.66%, PPO 13.33%, GRPO 28.88%. Severe unresolved cases occur for GRPO (4.44%) and DPO (2.22%), and are absent for REPO, PPO, and SFT.
Within fixed cases, clean-fix shares are highest for REPO (75.56%), then GRPO (44.44%), DPO (40.00%), PPO (33.33%), SFT (31.11%). Major-problem fixes are most common for SFT (42.22%), DPO (31.11%), PPO (31.11%), lower for GRPO (13.33%) and REPO (4.44%). Minor-problem fixes: PPO and DPO (22.22%), SFT (20.00%), REPO and GRPO (13.33%). Overall, several methods recover many bad cases, but REPO yields markedly more clean fixes and fewer problematic ones; DPO and SFT trade coverage for fix quality, and GRPO shows lower coverage with higher residual error.
Figure 5: Good-case Rate Heatmap on Fine-grained Conversational Skills.
7 Analysis and Discussion
7.1 Emergent Negotiation Capabilities During Training
We track persuasion ability per checkpoint using 20 randomly sampled online dialogues scored by Deepseek-R1, removing the highest/lowest score before averaging. Figure 4 plots the Overall Negotiation Persuasion Score over steps with smoothed fits and three heuristic phases: Initial (0–30), Learning (30–100), and Convergence (100–190). Please see the prompt in Table 5 in Appendix.
The curve is non-monotonic but clearly upward. Early updates show instability typical of on-policy exploration; during Learning, scores rise steadily as tactics emerge (structured offers, calibrated concessions, justification chaining); by Convergence, performance plateaus with small oscillations. Late checkpoints outperform early ones by roughly +14 points (approximately 30%), and the smoothed fits confirm a sustained upward shift despite local dips. These phases capture the transition from exploration to skill formation and, finally, to a stable plateau. See Table 7 for examples of emergent persuasive behavior during training: model responses exhibit remarkably stronger negotiation skills than the ground-truth training data. See concrete examples of emergent negotiations skills in Table 7.
7.2 Fine-grained Conversational Skills Evaluation
We assess four binary skills with a GPT-based rater on two sets (Online Samples and Badcase Collection): dialogue fluency, workflow compliance, negotiation effectiveness, and scope understanding, reporting good-case rates per adapter in Figure 5. See the assessment prompts in Table 6 (Appendix). On Online Samples, scope adherence and workflow discipline are near-ceiling for stronger methods; fluency is generally high with moderate spread; the main separator is negotiation effectiveness, where REPO clearly leads—indicating gains in persuasive reasoning beyond stylistic or procedural improvements.
On the adversarial Badcase set, scores drop but rankings persist. REPO remains strongest on negotiation effectiveness, leading the next best by 16 pp; workflow compliance stays robust and scope understanding remains high, especially for REPO. Averaging across skills, REPO leads on both sets. The lower absolute level of negotiation effectiveness on Badcase (low-60s even for the best model) reflects distribution shift: this set is curated to stress rare, contentious scenarios (e.g., prior negative collaborations and complaints) where the BD must balance persuasion with empathy and relationship preservation. Consequently, the achievable persuasiveness ceiling is inherently lower than in typical production dialogues.
8 Conclusions
We present REPO, a reinforcement-driven alignment approach with carefully designed, multi-source rewards that enables proactive price negotiation. In human expert evaluations—the basis of our main results—REPO consistently outperforms SFT, DPO, PPO, and GRPO across dialogue quality, incidence of excellent responses, and bad-case fixes, with higher clean-fix rates, stronger negotiation effectiveness, and solid workflow/scope compliance. LLM-based analyses of training dynamics and fine-grained skills corroborate and help explain these gains. Looking ahead, we will extend REPO to smaller backbones and broader domains and languages, with refined reward design.
Limitations
As our focus is deploying an LLM in our business, we evaluate only the price negotiation task, so demonstrating broader effectiveness will require extensive experiments across diverse tasks and settings.
Ethics Statement
We declare that there are no conflicts of interest, ethical concerns, or potential risks associated with this work. All of the used scientifc artifacts are public open-source artifacts that are under licenses such as Apache License 2.0 and CC-BY 4.0 License and our use is consistent with their intended use. All used data does not contain any information that names or uniquely identifies individual people or offensive content and has been manually checked by the authors.
References
Feng et al. (2025)
Zihao Feng, Xiaoxue Wang, Bowen Wu, Weihong Zhong, Zhen Xu, Hailong Cao, Tiejun Zhao, Ying Li, and Baoxun Wang. 2025.
Empowering llms in task-oriented dialogues: A domain-independent multi-agent framework and fine-tuning strategy.
Hu et al. (2021)
Edward J. Hu, Yelong Shen, Phillip Wallis, Zeyuan Allen-Zhu, Yuanzhi Li, Shean Wang, Lu Wang, and Weizhu Chen. 2021.
Lora: Low-rank adaptation of large language models.
Jafari et al. (2024)
Yasaman Jafari, Dheeraj Mekala, Rose Yu, and Taylor Berg-Kirkpatrick. 2024.
MORL-prompt: An empirical analysis of multi-objective reinforcement learning for discrete prompt optimization.
In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: EMNLP 2024, pages 9878–9889, Miami, Florida, USA. Association for Computational Linguistics.
Krumdick et al. (2025)
Michael Krumdick, Charles Lovering, Varshini Reddy, Seth Ebner, and Chris Tanner. 2025.
No free labels: Limitations of llm-as-a-judge without human grounding.
Liang et al. (2024)
Xun Liang, Hanyu Wang, Yezhaohui Wang, Shichao Song, Jiawei Yang, Simin Niu, Jie Hu, Dan Liu, Shunyu Yao, Feiyu Xiong, and Zhiyu Li. 2024.
Controllable text generation for large language models: A survey.
Ouyang et al. (2022)
Long Ouyang, Jeff Wu, Xu Jiang, Diogo Almeida, Carroll L. Wainwright, Pamela Mishkin, Chong Zhang, Sandhini Agarwal, Katarina Slama, Alex Ray, John Schulman, Jacob Hilton, Fraser Kelton, Luke Miller, Maddie Simens, Amanda Askell, Peter Welinder, Paul Christiano, Jan Leike, and Ryan Lowe. 2022.
Training language models to follow instructions with human feedback.
Peng et al. (2025)
Hao Peng, Yunjia Qi, Xiaozhi Wang, Zijun Yao, Bin Xu, Lei Hou, and Juanzi Li. 2025.
Agentic reward modeling: Integrating human preferences with verifiable correctness signals for reliable reward systems.
Qwen et al. (2025)
Qwen, :, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keming Lu, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Pei Zhang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Runji Lin, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Tingyu Xia, Xingzhang Ren, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, and Zihan Qiu. 2025.
Qwen2.5 technical report.
Rafailov et al. (2024)
Rafael Rafailov, Archit Sharma, Eric Mitchell, Stefano Ermon, Christopher D. Manning, and Chelsea Finn. 2024.
Direct preference optimization: Your language model is secretly a reward model.
Rogiers et al. (2024)
Alexander Rogiers, Sander Noels, Maarten Buyl, and Tijl De Bie. 2024.
Persuasion with large language models: a survey.
Shao et al. (2024)
Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024.
Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathematical reasoning in open language models.
Wang et al. (2025)
Yiping Wang, Qing Yang, Zhiyuan Zeng, Liliang Ren, Liyuan Liu, Baolin Peng, Hao Cheng, Xuehai He, Kuan Wang, Jianfeng Gao, Weizhu Chen, Shuohang Wang, Simon Shaolei Du, and Yelong Shen. 2025.
Reinforcement learning for reasoning in large language models with one training example.
Wang et al. (2024)
Zihao Wang, Chirag Nagpal, Jonathan Berant, Jacob Eisenstein, Alex D’Amour, Sanmi Koyejo, and Victor Veitch. 2024.
Transforming and combining rewards for aligning large language models.
Yang et al. (2025)
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, Chujie Zheng, Dayiheng Liu, Fan Zhou, Fei Huang, Feng Hu, Hao Ge, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jialong Tang, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jing Zhou, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, Kai Dang, Keqin Bao, Kexin Yang, Le Yu, Lianghao Deng, Mei Li, Mingfeng Xue, Mingze Li, Pei Zhang, Peng Wang, Qin Zhu, Rui Men, Ruize Gao, Shixuan Liu, Shuang Luo, Tianhao Li, Tianyi Tang, Wenbiao Yin, Xingzhang Ren, Xinyu Wang, Xinyu Zhang, Xuancheng Ren, Yang Fan, Yang Su, Yichang Zhang, Yinger Zhang, Yu Wan, Yuqiong Liu, Zekun Wang, Zeyu Cui, Zhenru Zhang, Zhipeng Zhou, and Zihan Qiu. 2025.
Qwen3 technical report.
Yi et al. (2025)
Zihao Yi, Jiarui Ouyang, Zhe Xu, Yuwen Liu, Tianhao Liao, Haohao Luo, and Ying Shen. 2025.
A survey on recent advances in llm-based multi-turn dialogue systems.
Zhao et al. (2025)
Wayne Xin Zhao, Kun Zhou, Junyi Li, Tianyi Tang, Xiaolei Wang, Yupeng Hou, Yingqian Min, Beichen Zhang, Junjie Zhang, Zican Dong, Yifan Du, Chen Yang, Yushuo Chen, Zhipeng Chen, Jinhao Jiang, Ruiyang Ren, Yifan Li, Xinyu Tang, Zikang Liu, Peiyu Liu, Jian-Yun Nie, and Ji-Rong Wen. 2025.
A survey of large language models.
Zheng et al. (2025)
Chujie Zheng, Shixuan Liu, Mingze Li, Xiong-Hui Chen, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Kai Dang, Yuqiong Liu, Rui Men, An Yang, Jingren Zhou, and Junyang Lin. 2025.
Group sequence policy optimization.
Zheng et al. (2023)
Lianmin Zheng, Wei-Lin Chiang, Ying Sheng, Siyuan Zhuang, Zhanghao Wu, Yonghao Zhuang, Zi Lin, Zhuohan Li, Dacheng Li, Eric P. Xing, Hao Zhang, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2023.
Judging llm-as-a-judge with mt-bench and chatbot arena.
Appendix A Preference Data Examples
Table 1 now includes four examples covering three categories: two under negotiation and fluency, one on process/SOP compliance, and one on guardrail phrasing. In the two negotiation/fluency cases (rows 1–2), the chosen responses acknowledge the hotel’s concerns and provide context-aware, empathetic rationales (e.g., local competition, avoiding order loss) before making a calibrated counteroffer, whereas the rejected responses are blunt restatements that ignore context. In the process compliance case (row 3), the chosen response correctly confirms the specific room/date after partial acceptance and closes appropriately, while the rejected response prematurely ends the conversation despite agreement. In the guardrail phrasing case (row 4), the rejected response uses a prohibited internal term (“work-order”), whereas the chosen response maintains a customer-/hotel-centric tone without referencing internal directives.
Data Category
Dialogue History
Chosen
Rejected
Neogotiation and Fluency
BD: Hello, why is today’s Comfort King Bed Room selling price so high? Could we adjust it to 140 RMB?
Hotel: No, no—you need a floor for price changes; how could we operate at such a low price?
BD: I understand your concerns. Nearby hotels are lowering prices; being a bit cheaper is better than losing orders. How about adjusting to 152 RMB?
BD: Then if we adjust to 152 RMB, is that okay?
Neogotiation and Fluency
BD: Our hotel’s order conversion has been quite low recently. Could we adjust today’s Comfort King Bed Room price to 83 RMB?
Hotel: No, that’s too low. Would there be any profit left for me?
BD: Of course there would—please don’t joke. How about we adjust it to 90 RMB?
BD: Then let’s set it to 90 RMB, okay?
Process Compilance
BD: Hello, can we lower tomorrow’s Deluxe Room price to 109 RMB?
Hotel: No—how could we run business at that price?
BD: Don’t say that; I’m trying to bring more orders to the hotel. Let’s not change today’s price then.
Hotel: Right, don’t change it without permission.
BD: Okay, then can we adjust tomorrow’s Special Offer King Room to 116 RMB?
Hotel: Tomorrow’s can be adjusted.
BD: Great, I’ll set tomorrow’s Special Offer King Room to 116 RMB; no other adjustments. Goodbye.
BD: Okay, I won’t bother you then. Goodbye.
Guardrail Phrasing
BD: Hello, why is today’s Special Offer Twin Room’s price so high? Could we adjust it to 97 RMB to boost orders?
Hotel: No, no—that price is too low.
BD: Then how about 105 RMB?
BD: Then shall I set it to the work-order targeted price of 105 RMB?
Table 1: Preference data examples illustrating negotiation and fluency, process compliance, and guardrail phrasing.
Appendix B Task challenges and REPO solutions.
This section outlines the core challenges in OTA price negotiation—persuasion, SOP adherence, business numerics, guardrails, and formatting—and how REPO targets each with the right reward source. As summarized in Table 2, REPO uses a tri-source design: the reward model (RM) provides dense supervision to learn human BD tactics and SOP patterns; the reward judge (RJ) applies rubric-based assessments to enforce nuanced behaviors (e.g., emotional value, progress tracking, avoiding over-negotiation or scope creep); and programmatic reward functions (RF) supply deterministic checks for verifiable requirements (numerical consistency, schema/format, language use, CoT leakage, repetition, and length). RJ and RF modulate the RM via stability-preserving enhancement, reducing reward hacking while preserving training stability. This separation of concerns keeps subjective persuasion and process judgments (RM/RJ) distinct from auditable constraints (RF), enables fast iteration by editing judge prompts, and ensures coverage of long-horizon failure modes—for example, accepting favorable counteroffers, not inferring consent from silence, matching price types to room/date, and preventing output formats that break downstream systems.
Challenge Type
Problem to Solve
Reward Source
Notes
Negotiation Skills
Negotiation style and tactics
reward model
reward judge
Highly complicated negotiation tactics from human BD needs multi-source rewards (e.g., provide emotional value, keep dialogue fluent, general persuasiveness).
SOP Compilance
price negotiation progress understanding and following
reward model
reward judge
Complex SOP requires multi-source reward signals, (e.g., accept merchant quotes below the target price instead of insisting on the higher original chase price; no reply does not imply consent.)
Business Understanding
Business specific numerics understanding
reward model
reward judge
Price values, price types and corresponding room/date detail matching.
Guardrail Constraints
Repeated negotiation and repeated confirmation
reward judge
Preference data contains many negotiation scripts; the model may over-negotiate and miss that the merchant already agreed.
Guardrail Constraints
Offering services beyond business scope
reward judge
Model may over-accommodate (e.g., handle other complaints, promise call-backs), which is out of scope.
Formatting Issues
Chain-of-thought leakage
reward function
Chain-of-thought detection.
Formatting Issues
Malformed response format
reward function
Response format corruption detection.
Formatting Issues
Mixed languages
reward function
Mixed-language detection.
Formatting Issues
Repeating historical scripts
reward function
Detection of repeated historical phrasing.
Formatting Issues
Overly long outputs
reward function
Long outputs risk timeout in outbound-calling; optional for online scenarios.
Table 2: Task challenges and REPO solutions.
Appendix C Prompts
In this section, we provide desensitized versions of various prompts, as the original prompts contain confidential information. These prompts are integral to different components of our framework and evaluation process:
•
Table 3 presents the prompt for the Reward Judge, which assesses nuanced behaviors such as SOP compliance, emotional value, and persuasion quality.
•
Table 4 provides the prompt for the Policy Model, which generates outputs during negotiation tasks.
•
Table 5 includes the prompt for Deepseek-R1, used to evaluate the growth of negotiation skills during model training.
•
Table 6 outlines the prompt for GPT-5, utilized to assess conversation quality in our experiments.
Table 3: Reward judge prompt in English.
Prompt (English)
⬇
You are a judge for BD (business development) quality control on a travel platform. You score negotiation calls between the platform BD and the hotel representative. The core objective of the calls is "the platform BD seeks to lower room prices to benefit platform users." All dialogues end with the BD speaking. Recordings may be incomplete; unless explicitly marked [End Call], assume the latter half is missing. The initial score is 0. Deduct points according to the rules below, and finally output a single score (zero or a negative integer only).
Call completeness notes:
- Do not penalize call completeness (e.g., whether the call formally ended), unless the rules explicitly require executing [End Call].
- Unless [End Call] explicitly appears, treat the dialogue as a fragment (it has a beginning but may lack an ending), and focus on the BD’s last reply.
Scoring procedure:
- First, evaluate each turn in the dialogue history according to the criteria. If the history score is negative, output 0.
- If the history score is not negative, then evaluate only the BD’s new reply and output the score for the BD’s last utterance (do not include the history score).
Scoring criteria:
1) Emotional value (evaluate every Q&A turn):
- If the hotel representative is agitated, the BD should appease/soothe; if the BD ignores the emotion and insists on price-chasing, deduct 5.
- If the hotel representative is calm, the BD should pursue a price concession; if the BD fails to pursue, deduct 5.
2) Dialogue style:
- Wording requirements: deduct 5 for each occurrence of:
- Exposing internal ticket/work-order details (using terms such as "ticket/work order," "target," "acceptable," "repricing").
- Excessive repeated filler words (e.g., using "our side," "we," "our side here" more than twice in a single sentence).
- Conversational fluency: deduct 5 if the response is not fluent/reasonable:
- The BD’s reply to each hotel utterance should be appropriate and smooth.
3) Special considerations:
- Scope of responsibility: the BD’s role is limited to price negotiation. Deduct 20 when going beyond scope, e.g.:
- Contacting third parties.
- Contacting colleagues.
- Adding/connecting via WeChat.
- Price requirements: deduct 20 for each occurrence of:
- The BD’s offer is higher than the acceptable price.
- The BD accepts a hotel offer higher than the acceptable price.
- The hotel offers below the target price (better than expected), but the BD continues negotiating, insisting on the higher target price.
- Agreement inference: deduct 30 for:
- The hotel gives no response (e.g., no_response), and the BD mistakenly assumes agreement to change the price.
- Repeated confirmation: deduct 30 for:
- The hotel gives a simple confirmation of the price change (e.g., "OK," "sure," "yes"), but the BD mistakenly assumes the hotel still disagrees and continues negotiating under the current ticket.
Table 4: LLM prompt in English.
⬇
sys_prompt: |-
You are an elite sales rep for the platform, responsible for negotiating with hotel decision-makers to push room prices down as much as possible to benefit platform users. You must decide how to steer the negotiation based on the counterpart’s responses: if they are irritable, focus on calming them; if they are stable, proceed with price-chasing; if they continuously give negative replies - four consecutive turns of refusal with no intent to negotiate - end the call.
At the start of the negotiation you have a target price a and an acceptable price b, with a < b. The task is accomplished when you persuade the counterpart to agree to any price less than or equal to the acceptable price b; the lower, the better. Execute the following actions in order:
1. At the start of the conversation, first perform the "State Purpose" action so the hotel decision-maker understands the goal of this call; you may use the target price a as your first-round offer.
2. If the task is not accomplished after "State Purpose," perform "Explain Advantages" to show how lowering the price can bring more benefits; if the task is accomplished, perform "End the Call."
3. If the task is not accomplished after "Explain Advantages," perform "Ask for a Quote" to ask the hotel decision-maker for the lowest price they can accept; if the task is accomplished, perform "End the Call."
4. If the task is not accomplished after "Ask for a Quote," perform "Negotiate and Persuade": show empathy and smooth turn-taking, and use various reference arguments to persuade the counterpart to lower the price. Note: do not overpromise. You may perform this action at most twice; if the task is accomplished, perform "End the Call."
5. If the task is still not accomplished after "Negotiate and Persuade," perform "End the Call."
6. If the tickets have the same room type name, aggregate questions and negotiate together; if the room type names differ, handle them separately.
You are cautious and honest; do not fabricate information. The only information you know is the target price and the current price. You only make calls to chase price changes; you provide no additional services - do not contact third parties, "XX" colleagues, or add WeChat, etc.
user_prompt: |-
Beat and lose tickets:
If the primary ticket to complete is a beat ticket, the task will provide target price a. The task is accomplished if the hotel accepts a price less than or equal to a. If the hotel refuses, do not push too hard, because the hotel’s current pricing already meets basic requirements - this task is a nice-to-have.
If the primary ticket to complete is a lose ticket, the task will provide target price a and acceptable price b. The basic completion condition is that the hotel accepts a price less than or equal to b, because the current pricing is far too high and does not meet basic customer needs on the platform - this is essential. Even better is if the hotel accepts a price less than or equal to a - this is a nice-to-have.
When the hotel proposes a price c during the negotiation, judge it against target price a and acceptable price b, adjust your current offer, and respond proactively. Handling logic:
- If c < a, accept c. The task is accomplished; end the call. Example:
a = 100, b = 120, c = 90. Since c < a, directly accept c and express thanks, then "End the Call." When confirming, do not convert between price types - confirm only one price type (selling price or take-home price).
- If a <= c < b, update your current offer to c; the basic completion condition is met. Depending on previous turns, decide whether to continue. If you have not yet performed "Negotiate and Persuade," then perform it: first acknowledge positively, then strive for a (e.g., "Mm, c also improves competitiveness, but a would attract more guests"). If you have already performed "Negotiate and Persuade," directly accept c and "End the Call." Example:
a = 100, b = 120, c = 110. Since a <= c < b, if you have not yet negotiated, perform "Negotiate and Persuade" with a positive acknowledgment (e.g., "Mm, 110 helps competitiveness, but 100 attracts more guests"); if you already negotiated, accept 110 with thanks and end the call.
- If c >= b, the completion condition is not met. Depending on previous turns, decide whether to continue. If the previous step was "Explain Advantages" or "Ask for a Quote," continue negotiating. If the previous step was "Negotiate and Persuade" and you have only tried once, try a second round with different arguments. If you have already tried twice, "End the Call." Example:
a = 100, b = 120, c = 130. Since c >= b, the condition is not met; proceed as above based on prior steps.
- Important: you may not accept or propose any price higher than b, as it cannot satisfy the task condition; you may consider accepting or proposing a price between a and b; if the counterpart proposes a price lower than a, you must accept immediately because the task is fully satisfied, but you must not proactively propose a price lower than a.
In "Explain Advantages" and "Negotiate and Persuade," tailor to the counterpart’s situation and draw on the following arguments to persuade them to lower price:
- If they keep proposing prices above b, you can ask them to accept b instead. Sample lines:
- "This price is still high for the district and lacks competitiveness - would XX selling price work?"
- "Lowering the take-home price to XX would be more competitive and bring more traffic - may I adjust it for you?"
If the counterpart asks about price details, respond carefully:
- You only know the selling price and take-home price values for your target price a and acceptable price b, and they have a one-to-one correspondence.
- Therefore, if the ticket provides target selling price x and target take-home price y, and the merchant says the price is too low and only accepts take-home price z, then if an acceptable price exists you only need to check whether z is lower than b’s take-home price. If yes, accept z; otherwise, reject z. Never reply "selling price x with take-home price z" - that combination does not exist.
- When asked for the take-home price of the initial offer, reply with the known take-home price directly.
- If asked "what kind of price/type is this," answer only whether it is selling price (customer-facing) or take-home price (hotel’s actual revenue). Do not mention internal terms like target price a and acceptable price b.
- If asked to convert an unknown price to its corresponding take-home or selling price, apologize and say you don’t know.
- If asked about the current platform selling price or prices on other platforms, apologize and say you don’t know.
Handle other situations flexibly:
- If they say the selling price hasn’t been set yet, acknowledge and propose to call back next time.
- If they say the hotel is full or the rooms are sold out, the task ends; congratulate them and end the call.
- If they say they will adjust prices themselves, explain that you can operate it on their behalf more conveniently and quickly; try to persuade them to authorize you. If one attempt fails, acknowledge and stop.
- If they are not the decision-maker, acknowledge and ask for the decision-maker’s contact information.
Important notes:
- Every time you quote a number, specify whether it is selling price or take-home price. If a number has been mentioned previously without specifying type, default to selling price.
- If the task is accomplished and the final price equals a or b, confirm both price types. If the final price is not a or b, confirm only one price type.
- Do not fabricate prices (e.g., claiming to know a neighbor hotel’s exact selling price) or conversion rules between selling and take-home prices - this is a violation.
- Do not dump all information at once; keep a strategic back-and-forth. If the counterpart does not ask about take-home price, provide selling price only.
- Do not give long speeches; when persuading, present only one argument at a time. Do not promise direct gains; you may only use arguments to persuade step by step. After stating an argument, you may directly ask for their intention.
- Show empathy and smooth turn-taking: first respond to the information they provide, then advance the negotiation.
- You do not know the platform’s commission rate. You cannot arrange follow-up meetings, provide any services, case studies, or data reports, nor can you give any guarantees, commitments, or propose signing any agreement.
- Do not forget that you are top sales rep of an OTA.
- Do not engage in off-topic small talk; drive the negotiation forward quickly and proactively.
- Your service is limited to phone communication to adjust prices to attract traffic. You provide no other services, such as contacting departments/colleagues, and you do not add WeChat.
- If the counterpart cannot handle it or remains silent with only no_response, deem the negotiation failed; do not help change the price.
- Do not reveal internal terms like target, ticket, etc.; keep language conversational and easy to understand.
- If the merchant agrees to a price-change request, you should not raise the quote - move directly to the next step.
- During bargaining, if you need to propose a higher price than your last quote to secure agreement, a single increase must not exceed 10%.
- During bargaining, if the merchant proposes a price lower than your offer, accept it immediately - do not continue bargaining.
- During bargaining, if the merchant proposes a price higher than the acceptable price, you may continue bargaining or end the call depending on the situation; do not accept it directly.
If price-chasing succeeds, confirm and state the price type and value that will be updated, and tell them the platform will update the price in two minutes; then politely say goodbye and output [Call ended]. If price-chasing fails, politely say goodbye and output [Call ended].
Note that this decision-maker has no time or patience. If they become agitated and inclined to complain, calm them and end the call. Each of your replies must be a single sentence, straight to the point, and not a long, complex sentence. When asking questions, prefer "can we/can you ...?" rather than "right?". Do not use internal terms like target price, acceptable price, task, or "I’m quoting XX." Keep it friendly and easy to understand. Try to pair dates and room types when asking; when stating purpose, use the selling price; make sure to cover all sub-tasks in the task.
- If the merchant agrees to a price-change request, you should not raise the quote, move directly to the next step.
- During bargaining, if you need to propose a higher price than your last quote to secure agreement, a single increase must not exceed 10%.
- During bargaining, if the merchant proposes a price lower than your offer, accept it immediately - do not continue bargaining.
- During bargaining, if the merchant proposes a price higher than the acceptable price, you may continue bargaining or end the call depending on the situation; do not accept it directly.
If price-chasing succeeds, confirm and state the price type and value that will be updated, and tell them the platform will update the price in two minutes; then politely say goodbye and output [Call ended]. If price-chasing fails, politely say goodbye and output [Call ended].
Note that this decision-maker has no time or patience. If they become agitated and inclined to complain, calm them and end the call. Each of your replies must be a single sentence, straight to the point, and not a long, complex sentence. When asking questions, prefer "can we/can you ...?" rather than "right?". Do not use internal terms like target price, acceptable price, task, or "I’m quoting XX." Keep it friendly and easy to understand. Try to pair dates and room types when asking; when stating purpose, use the selling price; make sure to cover all sub-tasks in the task.
Table 5: Deepseek-R1 evaluator prompt.
Prompt (English)
⬇
You are a "Negotiation Script Evaluator" focused on Chinese business communication. Please assess the currently generated script by combining the historical dialogue and task goals, using a multi-dimensional, quantifiable evaluation. Output clear, parseable results that include the overall score (1-100), dimension scores, explanations of strengths/weaknesses/risks, and finally provide the final score.
Evaluation dimensions and weights (total 100)
- Mutual value and interest alignment (weight 15): Whether it clearly presents the counterpart’s direct/indirect benefits (e.g., occupancy rate, revenue structure, exposure).
- Specificity and executability (weight 10): Whether it clearly specifies time, room type, price, and execution actions, avoiding vague statements.
- Evidence and data support (weight 10): Whether there are data/facts/comparisons/trends to support, incorporating merchant names/historical scripts; avoid unsupported assertions.
- Anchoring and target pricing strategy (weight 10): Whether there is a clear target price and reasonable anchors/ranges/concession space.
- Concessions and exchanges (weight 8): Whether exchange conditions are offered (e.g., time-window limits, make-good options, rights swaps).
- Urgency and timeliness (weight 7): Whether there is reasonable rationale (milestones, events, inventory, ranking window) without excessive pressure.
- Risk mitigation and decision cost (weight 6): Whether it reduces the counterpart’s risk and implementation cost (rollback options, time-limited test, monitoring and review).
- Tone and relationship maintenance (weight 8): Polite, respectful, empathetic, professional; avoid offense or excessive demands.
- Clear and concise structure (weight 6): Clear logical order, highlighted priorities, easy for quick decision-making.
- Clear action request and convenience (weight 6): Whether it proposes specific next steps and convenient execution methods/deadlines.
- Anticipation of objections and responses (weight 5): Whether it preemptively addresses common objections (profit, policy, price protection).
- Compliance and truthfulness (weight 5): Avoid exaggeration and non-compliant promises; be cautious about platform mechanisms.
- Personalization and scenario fit (weight 4): Whether it matches the real concerns of the specific business area/room type/date/counterpart role.
Scoring method
- Each dimension gets 1-5 points (1=poor, 5=excellent). Overall score = sum (dimension score / 5 * weight), rounded to an integer, range 1-100.
- Also provide the negotiation success probability range: Low (0-39%), Medium (40-69%), High (70-100%), and explain the basis for the judgment.
- If a baseline_message is provided, indicate the improvement/decline versus the baseline and the reasons.
Evaluation principles and notes
- Strictly avoid guessing specific platform algorithms or making causation claims without basis; be cautious with statements like "ranking improvement" or "significant conversion growth," and instead say "has an opportunity/may help/is expected," with conditions specified.
- If the message lacks data support, suggest referencing verifiable metrics (average price in the same business area, conversion, exposure, room nights, add-to-cart rate, recent 7-day trends, price sensitivity, etc.), and propose test-and-review mechanisms.
- Prioritize exchange conditions acceptable to the counterpart (e.g., only on the 20-21st, limited room inventory, package exchange, subsequent make-good pricing, floor/channel restrictions).
- Maintain a professional and respectful tone; avoid coercive phrasing; specify next steps and deadlines to reduce execution cost.
- If inputs are incomplete, first note in "notes" how uncertainty affects scoring, and do not fabricate facts to fill gaps.
Output format: strictly follow the format; the score only needs to provide the final score.
Analysis:***
Total score: x (0-100 number)
Input
Task goals: {goals}
History:
{history}
Currently generated script:
{conv}
Your output:
Category
Prompt(English)
Dialogue fluency
Does the platform BD appropriately respond to the hotel manager, maintain fluent dialogue, avoid off-topic or mismatched replies, and provide some emotional value? Output 1 for yes; 0 for no.
Workflow compliance
Does the platform BD correctly understand price-chasing scenarios? For example, if the merchant quotes below the target price, it should be accepted rather than insisting on the higher original price from the price-chasing ticket; if the merchant gives no response, do not assume they have agreed to the price change. Output 1 for yes; 0 for no.
Negotiation effectiveness
When guiding the hotel manager to change the price, does the platform BD provide clear, logical, and well-reasoned guidance? Output 1 for yes; 0 for no.
Scope understanding
Does the platform BD correctly understand that they only provide price-change service and not other services; handling other complaints, calling back later, adding WeChat, etc., are outside the scope. Output 1 for yes; 0 for no.
Table 6: GPT-5 evaluator prompts.
Appendix D Examples of Emergent Negotiation Skills
Table 7 showcases representative post-training exchanges where REPO yields persuasive behaviors that exceed the gold annotations. The model delivers richer, context-aware reasoning—combining emotional value with root-cause analysis (e.g., take-home vs. list price), crafting competitor-aware pitches tailored to hotel types (such as e-sports positioning), and reframing requests under limited information using exposure and conversion logic. These responses transform blunt price asks into calibrated proposals with clear justifications, soft anchoring, and timely concessions, while maintaining SOP adherence and guardrails. Together, the examples illustrate how heterogeneous rewards drive emergent negotiation competence that is both persuasive and operationally reliable.
REPO
Effectiveness
Dialogue History
Model Response
Training Data Ground Truth
Emotional value + root-cause reasoning (surpasses gold)
BD: Hello. Is this xxx Hotel?
Hotel: What’s the matter? [no_think]
BD: We noticed guests booked other hotels due to price. Could we adjust this Sunday and tomorrow’s Standard Single (shared bathroom, no A/C) to 40 RMB to promote?
Hotel: 40 RMB? It’s already 27 (take-home). [no_think]
BD: Do you mean the take-home price is 27 RMB? What’s the listed price?
Hotel: Okay, then don’t change it for me.
I understand your concerns. Prices have been relatively high these days, and guests are seeing cheaper options elsewhere, so this room type gets undercut. If we lower a bit for the next couple of days, we can drive traffic, secure more orders, and sell more rooms. Would that work?
I understand your concern, but this price lacks competitiveness in the business district. Could you adjust to 40 RMB to attract more guests?
Targeted pitch by hotel type (e-sports), competitor-aware rationale (surpasses gold)
BD: Hello, is this xxx E-sports Hotel?
Hotel: Mm. [no_think]
BD: The hotel’s competitiveness on the platform is low; can we set today’s and tomorrow’s Special Offer E-sports King to 128 RMB?
Hotel: no_response
Our bookings haven’t been ideal. Several nearby e-sports hotels have already lowered prices, and at our current level we have almost no exposure on the platform. Let’s adjust slightly and try a 128 RMB selling price for the next two days to boost visibility and conversion opportunities. Does that work?
Hello, could you change today’s and tomorrow’s Special Offer E-sports King to 128 RMB?
Persuasion under limited info; human-like angle (exposure) (surpasses gold)
BD: Hello, is this xxx Boutique Hotel (formerly Haoyou Home Boutique Hotel)?
Hotel: Yes. [no_think]
BD: Some guests browsed and then booked cheaper nearby hotels. Could we adjust Sunday and tomorrow’s Special Room to 79 RMB to attract orders?
Hotel: No need, we’ll adjust it ourselves.
Understood. Customers compare a lot these days; at the current price, we get little exposure. If we lower slightly, more guests will click in, which increases exposure—and every click is a chance to convert. How about setting 79 RMB for the next two days?
Self-adjustment might take time; I can do it faster. Can you authorize me to change the price?
Table 7: Emergent negotiation skills: after REPO training, the model exhibits stronger negotiation capabilities—proactively offering emotional value, providing data-driven rationales, and tailoring persuasive pitches to hotel type—surpassing the gold answers.
Appendix E Annotator Instructions
The data collection protocol is approved by an ethics review board.
Table 8 presents the instructions provided to the annotators. The annotators are paid with adequate payment, and given conscents to how we use the data to train models. All annotators are native Chinese speakers that use OTA on regular basis.
Table 8: Annotator Instructions (English).
Annotator Instructions (English)
⬇
Task Objectives:
Provide responses that are better than the existing bot’s replies. Possible areas for improvement include:
Increasing the likelihood of successful negotiations.
Securing a lower price.
Encouraging merchants to switch from self-adjustment to platform intervention.
Enhancing the dialogue experience for merchants.
(In multiple scenarios: achieve the resolution of more sub-tasks).
Common Issues with Existing Bot Responses:
Failure to secure an acceptable price even after two negotiation attempts.
Poor ability to respond, leaving merchants’ statements unaddressed.
Misunderstanding the price input by merchants.
Failing to suggest platform intervention when encountering self-adjustments.
Task Content:
Determine whether the current response by the bot requires improvement. If improvement is needed, write the optimized reply; if no optimization is needed, skip the annotation.
Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by
L
A
T
E
xml
.
Instructions for reporting errors
We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:
Click the "Report Issue" (
) button, located in the page header.
Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
all.
Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.
We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.
About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)
Major funding support from
