http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04049v1
Encoding Numeric Computations and Infusing Heuristic Knowledge Using Integrity Constraints in stableKanren
2025-10-05T06:03:27Z
2025-10-05T06:03:27Z
This paper presents examples of using integrity constraints in stableKanren to encode numeric computations for problem solving. Then, we use one of the examples to introduce multiple ways to infuse heuristic knowledge and reduce solving time. stableKanren is an extension of miniKanren that supports normal logic programs under stable model semantics. stableKanren further supports numeric computation by constructing a constraint store for integrity constraints. There are three ways to extend a relational programming language with numeric computations: relational number representation, grounding numbers to symbols, and constraint store construction. We demonstrate that the numeric computations in stableKanren have a straightforward numerical representation compared to relational number representations. More importantly, stableKanren balances symbolic and numeric computation in relational programming by avoiding the grounding of all numbers to symbols. Lastly, it also has simpler syntax compared to other constraint store construction approaches. stableKanren supports combinatorial search problem solving under a declarative generate and test paradigm. Such a paradigm generates all possible combinations of solutions to the problem, then applies a set of constraints to prune out the unwanted solutions. We demonstrate that different approaches to writing programs or queries affect the solver's performance in the SEND+MORE=MONEY puzzle. The performance gradually improves as more heuristic knowledge is infused through the programs or queries. Additionally, we show how to use an external function to achieve a hybrid solution.

http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.04081v1
Scaling Code-Assisted Chain-of-Thoughts and Instructions for Model Reasoning
2025-10-05T07:59:24Z
2025-10-05T07:59:24Z
Reasoning capability is pivotal for Large Language Models (LLMs) to solve complex tasks, yet achieving reliable and scalable reasoning remains challenging. While Chain-of-Thought (CoT) prompting has become a mainstream approach, existing methods often suffer from uncontrolled generation, insufficient quality, and limited diversity in reasoning paths. Recent efforts leverage code to enhance CoT by grounding reasoning in executable steps, but such methods are typically constrained to predefined mathematical problems, hindering scalability and generalizability. In this work, we propose Caco (Code-Assisted Chain-of-ThOught), a novel framework that automates the synthesis of high-quality, verifiable, and diverse instruction-CoT reasoning data through code-driven augmentation. Unlike prior work, Caco first fine-tunes a code-based CoT generator on existing math and programming solutions in a unified code format, then scales the data generation to a large amount of diverse reasoning traces. Crucially, we introduce automated validation via code execution and rule-based filtering to ensure logical correctness and structural diversity, followed by reverse-engineering filtered outputs into natural language instructions and language CoTs to enrich task adaptability. This closed-loop process enables fully automated, scalable synthesis of reasoning data with guaranteed executability. Experiments on our created Caco-1.3M dataset demonstrate that Caco-trained models achieve strong competitive performance on mathematical reasoning benchmarks, outperforming existing strong baselines. Further analysis reveals that Caco's code-anchored verification and instruction diversity contribute to superior generalization across unseen tasks. Our work establishes a paradigm for building self-sustaining, trustworthy reasoning systems without human intervention.

