Publications – Google Research Skip to main content Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Research Explore our many areas of focus Explore all research areas Applied AI & sciences Earth AI Health AI Science AI Sustainability & crisis resilience Foundational ML & algorithms Algorithms & theory Information retrieval Machine intelligence Machine perception Natural language processing People, systems & quantum AI Human-computer interaction and visualization Networking Quantum AI Responsible AI Anti abuse Software engineering Software systems Learn More Publications Projects Resources Building a collaborative ecosystem Datasets Access high-quality datasets to accelerate your research. Tools & services Explore our latest AI models and products. Open source Discover open-source code and collaborate with the community. Conferences & events Careers Shaping the future together See all programs Faculty programs Participating in the academic research community through meaningful engagement with university faculty. Student programs Supporting the next generation of researchers through a wide range of programming. R&D programs Collaborating with industry and academic experts to support foundational science and innovation. Locations Find your place in our global offices and research labs. Blog About Translating discovery into real-world impact People Our researchers drive advancements in computer science through both fundamental and applied research. Teams Collaborative groups tackling the world's most challenging AI problems. Google Research Google AI Learn about all our AI Google DeepMind Explore the frontier of AI Google Labs Try our AI experiments Research Resources Conferences & events Careers Blog About Search Publications Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. Our teams aspire to make discoveries that impact everyone, and core to our approach is sharing our research and tools to fuel progress in the field. See Filters results Filter by: Clear Year 2027 2 2026 391 2025 677 2024 724 2023 821 2022 885 2021 1029 2020 1067 2019 966 2018 793 2017 598 2016 509 2015 387 2014 342 2013 363 2012 386 2011 334 2010 309 2009 327 2008 268 2007 216 2006 132 2005 58 2004 18 2003 14 2002 5 2001 5 2000 2 1999 2 1998 3 Team Algorithms and Optimization 323 Applied science 186 Athena 549 Climate and Sustainability 10 Cloud AI 46 Euphonia 12 I-DRIM 133 Language 235 Perception 291 Research Area Algorithms and Theory 1445 Climate and Sustainability 36 Data Management 180 Data Mining and Modeling 364 Distributed Systems and Parallel Computing 380 Economics and Electronic Commerce 367 Education Innovation 71 General Science 381 Hardware and Architecture 172 Health & Bioscience 424 Human-Computer Interaction and Visualization 886 Information Retrieval and the Web 436 Machine Intelligence 4141 Machine Perception 1539 Machine Translation 150 Mobile Systems 117 Natural Language Processing 1137 Networking 333 Quantum Computing 140 Responsible AI 248 Robotics 200 Security, Privacy and Abuse Prevention 573 Software Engineering 241 Software Systems 487 Speech Processing 562 Sort By Title Title, descending Year Year, descending 1 - 15 of 11591 publications chip template Remove A 3D Scene Graphs Survey: Open Challenges and Future Directions Dennis Rotondi Francesco Argenziano Sebastian Koch Nathan Hughes Martin Büchner Johanna Wald Lukas Schmid Daniele Nardi Abhinav Valada Liam Paul Federico Tombari Luca Carlone Kai Arras Annual Review of Control, Robotics, and Autonomous Systems (ARCRAS), 10 (2027) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract 3D Scene Graphs (3DSGs) have emerged as a powerful representation for spatial AI by combining geometric grounding with semantic and relational abstractions of the environment. Their expressiveness has made them relevant to a broad range of problems in robotics and computer vision, including mapping, task and motion planning, scene understanding, and many others. However, the field remains fragmented: different communities adopt distinct formulations, construction pipelines, and evaluation protocols, making it difficult to compare methods, identify common assumptions, and assess remaining challenges for robust real- world deployment. This survey provides a unified and critical review of 3DSGs, with particular emphasis on open challenges and future directions. We first formalize 3DSGs under a common definition and analyze the principal modeling choices that characterize existing formulations, including node and edge attributes, hierarchical structure, dynamic scene representations, and affordance-aware extensions. We then review how 3DSGs are constructed from raw sensory observations, covering both learning-oriented and construction-oriented systems. Finally, we examine downstream applications and evaluation strategies, from intrinsic graph quality to task-level performance. To support the community, we also provide a dedicated website that organizes and extends the surveyed works. View details When Android Apps Request Location with a Reason: A Developer Study and User Behavior Experiment Alex Berke May Smith Aman Jain Mihai Christodorescu Proceedings on Privacy Enhancing Technologies (2027) Preview Preview abstract Recent reports have highlighted how mobile apps share user location data with third parties, risking user privacy and platform trust. Although location data is highly sensitive, when users grant apps location access, they may not know the full extent to which it is used. We study how requiring Android apps to show a reason for location access could impact developers, users, and the platform.

We surveyed 323 Android app developers and found most supported such a requirement. The majority said it would have a positive impact on user privacy, trust for apps, and trust for Android, where impact on user trust for Android correlated most strongly with support. Many developers also said the intervention would increase the number of users granting location access. Yet their open-ended comments also revealed consistent concerns, such as apps providing dishonest reasons and platform verification.

To study the impact on user behavior, we conducted a randomized controlled experiment with 2579 US Android users.  We tested how users' decisions to grant location access were impacted by app type, whether reasons were included in the requests, and the content of the reasons, including monetization. We did not find the reasons impacted users' decisions; decisions were instead driven by app type and demographics. Yet we did find the reasons could have a positive impact on user perception for the platform when the reasons did not include using data for ads. Our findings provide insights into developers' willingness to implement privacy-enhancing changes, and expose limits to improving user privacy by simply adding information to user interfaces. View details Securing the Agentic Enterprise Khushan Adatiya Amazon Kindle (2026) Preview Preview abstract Securing the Agentic Enterprise: Threat Modeling, Anomaly Detection, and Governing Autonomous Multi-Agent Systems addresses the critical security and governance gaps emerging as enterprises transition from human-supervised copilots to autonomous agentic workflows. As software processes gain the ability to reason, decompose natural language objectives, and execute multi-step tool calls at machine speed, traditional syntactic security boundaries (like firewalls and static analysis) become obsolete.

This book provides security architects, CISOs, and platform engineers with a practical, architecture-level blueprint for securing this new paradigm. It explores novel attack vectors such as indirect prompt injections and consumption-based economic threats and provides frameworks for robust mitigation. Key topics include modernizing agentic identity, implementing semantic firewalls, transition-state anomaly detection, and applying zero-trust principles to autonomous execution contexts. Bridging the gap between high-level ethical guidelines and isolated model safety, this guide prepares practitioners to confidently deploy and govern enterprise-grade autonomous systems. View details GGN: Experiences in Designing and Deploying Next-Generation Google Global Network Mohammad Al-Fares Richard Alimi Arda Balkanay Dennis Fetterly Chi-yao Hong Nachikethas Jagadeesan Bikash Koley Priya Mahadevan Subhasree Mandal Warren Martins Arjun Muralidharan Namrata Pralhad Kadam Aman Shaikh Anees Shaikh Rob Shakir Arjun Singh Sankalp Singh Charith Wickramaarachchi Min Zhu Jonathan Zolla 2026 Preview Preview abstract Cloud and AI/ML workloads are posing unprecedented new requirements on the wide-area network: it must combine strict availability, massive growth, and feature agility. It became increasingly clear that traditional WAN designs were ill-equipped to adapt to these requirements.

We present Google's Global Network (GGN), a major architectural redesign of our WAN that evolves B2 and B4 into a single, modular, and highly available software-defined network.  The architecture is designed around three pillars: (1) A modular design of functional domains with well-defined APIs; (2) a physically sharded and regionalized core for fault isolation and horizontal scaling; (3) a vendor-agnostic hardware strategy based on open standards. We share the multi-year deployment journey of GGN, including a safe, host-steered migration strategy, and demonstrate its ability to improve network availability and reaction time to failures, setting a foundation for a planet-scale modern WAN. View details Leveraging LLMs to understand public perception of earthquake early warnings: A case study of the 2025 M6.2 Türkiye Earthquake Hanjing Wang Mostafa Mousavi Patrick Robertson Richard Allen Alexei Barski Robert Bosch Nivetha Thiruverahan Youngmin Cho Tajinder Gadh Steve Malkos Boone Spooner Greg Wimpey Marc Stogaitis Scientific Reports, 16 (2026), pp. 22226 Preview Preview abstract Android's Earthquake Alert (AEA) system provided life-saving early warnings to millions during the M6.2 Marmara Ereğlisi, Türkiye earthquake on April 23, 2025. This event, the largest in the region in 25 years, served as a critical real-world test for smartphone-based Earthquake Early Warning (EEW) systems. The AEA system successfully delivered alerts to users with high precision, offering over a minute of warning before the strongest shaking reached urban areas. This study leveraged Large Language Models (LLMs) to analyze 560 public social media posts from the X platform, extracting 42 distinct attributes related to user experience and behavior. Statistical analyses revealed significant relationships, notably a strong correlation between user trust and alert timeliness. Key findings indicate that alerts received before shaking, clear information, and audible notifications significantly increased the likelihood of active protective responses and enhanced perceived usefulness and future trust in the system. Conversely, annoyance and perceived inaccuracy led to inaction and diminished trust. The study highlights the profound impact of smartphone-based EEW in mitigating seismic risk, providing actionable insights for optimizing alert design, public education campaigns, and future behavioral research to improve the effectiveness of such systems in seismically active regions. View details Dynamic Cogeneration of Bug Reproduction Test in Agentic Program Repair Sam Cheng Michele Tufano José Cambronero Renyao Wei Sherry Y. Shi Grant Uy Pat Rondon Franjo Ivancic 34th ACM International Conference on the Foundations of Software Engineering (FSE) (2026) Preview Preview abstract Bug Reproduction Tests (BRTs) have been used in many Automated Program Repair (APR) systems, primarily for validating fixes and aiding fix generation. In practice, when developers submit a patch, they often implement the BRT alongside the fix. Our experience deploying agentic APR reveals that developers desire a BRT within AI-generated patches to increase their confidence. However, canonical APR systems tend to generate BRTs and fixes separately, and focus on producing only the fix in the final patch. In this paper, we study agentic APR in the context of cogeneration, where the APR agent is instructed to generate both a fix and a BRT in the same patch. We evaluate the effectiveness of different cogeneration strategies on 120 human-reported bugs at Google and characterize different cogeneration strategies by their influence on APR agent behavior. We develop and evaluate patch selectors that account for test change to select patches with plausible fixes (and plausible BRTs). Finally, we analyze the root causes of failed cogeneration trajectories.  We show that cogeneration allows the APR agent to generate BRTs for at least as many bugs as a dedicated BRT agent, without compromising the generation rate of plausible fixes, thereby reducing engineering effort in maintaining and coordinating separate generation pipelines for fix and BRT at scale. View details Rational Area Profiles of Regular Polygons Cut by Two Congruent Diagonals Keiichi Watanabe Shoichi Inoue 2026 Preview Preview abstract Regular-polygon geometry is tightly linked to cyclotomic arithmetic: Poonen and Rubinstein’s treatment of three-diagonal concurrence, for example, turns a geometric incidence condition into a short vanishing sum of roots of unity.

We prove an analogous rigidity result for areas. Two congruent crossing diagonals divide a regular n-gon into four regions. For the four regions cut out by the two congruent crossing diagonals V0Vm and VkVn−m+k of a regular n-gon, we completely classify, for all parameters (n, k, m), which sums of the normalized areas a0, . . . , a3 are rational. The classification has a sharp finite–infinite contrast: a0 is rational in only five configurations, whereas the rational cases for a2 and adjacent two-region sums form infinite families. Rationality is delicately sensitive to the parameters: for the configuration (14, 3, 5), no nontrivial subset sum is rational, while the neighboring cut (14, 4, 5) gives a2 = 5/7.
The proof reduces each rationality condition to trigonometric relations at rational multiples of π and combines cyclotomic norm arguments with the classification theorems of Conway–Jones and Poonen–Rubinstein. View details Beyond Vector Similarity: Hierarchical Context-Aware Graph RAG vs Standard RAG in Enterprise Code  Migration Suddhasatwa Bhaumik Nilesh Jaiswal Arjit Shukla Divya Malhotra Aniket Agrawal Saurabh Garg Suchit Puri Google Cloud India, Google, S. No, AP81, 83, N Main Rd, near Hard Rock Cafe, Koregaon Park Annexe, Mundhwa, Pune, Maharashtra 411036 (2026) Preview Preview abstract As enterprises modernize legacy systems (e.g., monolithic Java architectures to Python microservices), Large Language Models (LLMs) have become instrumental in automated code translation.

However, traditional vector-based Retrieval-Augmented Generation (Standard RAG) struggles
with topological relationships, fetching isolated text chunks that frequently sever inheritance chains and lead to high compilation failure rates.

This paper presents a comparative analysis between Standard RAG and a novel Hierarchical
Context-Resident Graph (HCRG) methodology. Our pipeline utilizes tree-sitter for polyglot
Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) extraction, mapping architectural edges into a Google Cloud Spanner Property Graph, and serializing this structure into a Gemini (on Vertex AI) Context Cache to enable topological, parent-first code translation.

By shifting evaluation from naive text-overlap to a custom 7-metric framework measuring Software Engineering (SE) utility, empirical evaluations on the spring-petclinic-genai repository
demonstrate significant structural improvements. Graph RAG decisively mitigates dependency loss, dropping the API hallucination rate from 56.4% to 16.2%.

Furthermore, it improves Dependency Resolution Quality (DRQ) from 34.8% to
65.9% and enhances Parent-Child Consistency (PCC) from 26.7% to 45.5%. Interestingly, traditional lexical metrics fail to capture this divergence; both methodologies achieved
an identical 91% average CodeBLEU score, effectively masking Standard RAG’s structural
failures behind syntactically plausible but broken code.

However, the results indicate that Graph RAG is not strictly superior across all dimensions. Providing the LLM with dense, global structural context introduces new vulnerabilities: Graph RAG suffers a severe degradation in Cyclomatic Complexity Consistency
(dropping from Standard RAG’s 71.6% to 46.7%) due to defensive over-engineering
by the LLM, alongside a slight drop in Docstring Preservation (67.0% down to 61.0%)
caused by prompt attention dilution.

Ultimately, this research validates that while Graph RAG trades an increase in code complexity
for critical reductions in API hallucinations, it offers a substantially more viable and architecturally sound path for automated enterprise codebase modernisation. View details Geo-Contextual AI Concierge: Minimizing Internal Support Friction Through Proactive Knowledge Synthesis Neeraj Choudhary Dónal Doyle Technical Report (2026) Preview Preview abstract In large-scale distributed enterprises, traditional Knowledge Management (KM) systems face a critical failure mode: static documentation cannot keep pace with evolving operational realities and regional nuances. This "knowledge latency" forces employees out of self-service workflows and into costly support ticketing queues. This paper introduces SENTINEL, a geo-contextual AI framework designed to shift enterprise support from reactive retrieval to proactive interception. The architecture employs a novel dual-engine system integrated into an omni-present interface. The first engine utilizes Large Language Models (LLMs) to conduct pre-emptive, historical case-grounded audits of documentation, generating a "Contextual Density" score that identifies friction zones. The second engine is an autonomous Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) agent that surfaces in-situ via a location-intelligent assistant window, resolving queries in real-time. By functioning as a strategic "defensive barrier" at the point of origin, SENTINEL demonstrates how a proactive AI assistant can drive high-fidelity, in-situ case deflection. View details TFRBench: A Reasoning Benchmark for Evaluating Forecasting Systems Mihir Parmar MD ATIK AHAMED Palash Goyal Jinsung Yoon Hamid Palangi Chun-Liang Li Tomas Pfister Yiwen Song Long Le Qiang Cheng Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning (2026) Preview Preview abstract Time-series forecasting has traditionally been evaluated solely on numerical accuracy, treating models as "black boxes'' that fail to capture the underlying reasoning. To address this gap, we introduce TFRBench, a novel benchmark designed to evaluate the reasoning capabilities of forecasting systems alongside their numerical accuracy. Unlike existing benchmarks, TFRBench requires models to generate verifiable natural language reasoning by analyzing cross-channel dependencies, identifying strategic trends, and justifying significant events using external context. To construct this benchmark, we propose a systematic multi-agent framework comprising Reasoning, Search, Verifier, Forecasting, and Summary agents. Our benchmark spans five diverse domains including Energy, Sales, Web/CloudOps, Transportation, and Finance, covering 10 distinct datasets. Qualitative evaluation confirms that our generated reasoning is highly faithful and effective; specifically, Large Language Models (LLMs) prompted with our generated reasoning demonstrate significantly improved forecasting accuracy compared to direct forecasting with LLMs. Conversely, benchmarking experiments reveal that off-the-shelf LLMs consistently struggle with both reasoning (shows lower LLM-as-Judge scores) and direct numerical forecasting (MAE and MASE), frequently failing to capture domain-specific dynamics. TFRBench thus establishes a new standard for interpretable, reasoning-based evaluation in time-series forecasting. View details Performance analysis of updated Sleep Tracking algorithms across Google and Fitbit wearable devices Arno Charton Linda Lei Siddhant Swaroop Marius Guerard Michael Dixon Logan Niehaus Shao-Po Ma Logan Schneider Ross Wilkinson Ryan Gillard Conor Heneghan Pramod Rudrapatna Mark Malhotra Shwetak Patel Google, Google, 1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
Mountain View, CA 94043 (2026) (to appear) Preview Preview abstract Background: The general public has increasingly adopted consumer wearables for sleep tracking over the past 15 years, but reports on performance versus gold standards such as polysomnogram (PSG), high quality sleep diaries and at-home portable EEG systems still show potential for improved performance. Two aspects in particular are worthy of consideration: (a) improved recognition of sleep sessions (times when a person is in bed and has attempted to sleep), and (b) improved accuracy on recognizing sleep stages relative to an accepted standard such as PSG.
Aims: This study aimed to: 1) provide an update on the methodology and performance of a system for correctly recognizing valid sleep sessions, and 2) detail an updated description of how sleep stages are calculated using accelerometer and inter-beat intervals
Methods: Novel machine learning algorithms were developed to recognize sleep sessions and sleep stages using accelerometer sensors and inter-beat intervals derived from the watch or tracker photoplethysmogram. Algorithms were developed on over 3000 nights of human-scored free-living sleep sessions from a representative population of 122 subjects, and then tested on an independent validation set of 47 users. Within sleep sessions, an algorithm was developed to recognize periods when the user was attempting to sleep (Time-Attempting-To-Sleep = TATS). For sleep stage estimation, an algorithm was trained on human expert-scored polysomnograms, and then tested on 50 withheld subject nights for its ability to recognize Wake, Light (N1/N2), Deep (N3) and REM sleep relative to expert scored labels.
Results: For sleep session estimation, the algorithm had at least 95% overlap on TATS with human consensus scoring for 94% of nights from healthy sleepers. For sleep stage estimation, comparing with the current Fitbit algorithm, Cohen’s kappa for four-class determination of sleep stage increased from an average of 0.56 (std 0.13) to 0.63 (std 0.12), and average accuracy increased from 71% (std 0.10)  to 77% (std 0.078)
Conclusion: A set of new algorithms has been developed and tested on Fitbit and Pixel Watches and is capable of providing robust and accurate measurement of sleep in free-living environments. View details ARM-Orchestrated Dynamic Workload Partitioning for Vision Model Training on FPGA Accelerators Ram Babu Penugonda Swaroop Arlagadda 2026 Preview Preview abstract Silent performance degradation and accelerator contention remain largely unaddressed in contemporary heterogeneous training systems, where Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) offloading decisions are often static, heuristic-driven, or evaluated using idealized assumptions that ignore queueing effects, transfer overheads, and shared accelerator load. This paper introduces a runtime, price-conscious co-execution integration of CPU and FPGA to train deep learning models, where execution choices are dynamically made at the training stage granularity with a discrete latency cost model. The proposed method incorporates the CPU execution latency estimation, FPGA queue depth monitoring, time-varying service rate modeling, background contention, data transfer overhead, and switching hysteresis into a single decision mechanism that is driven by an ARM-based runtime monitor. The model is realistic FPGA queueing model, which is used to simulate shared accelerator contention and avoid optimistic assumptions of performance. Experimental evaluation on a representative convolutional training pipeline demonstrates that the cost-minimizing orchestration case achieves a mean training step time of 0.0213 s (±0.0036) with a throughput proxy of 47.03 steps/s, while maintaining bounded FPGA queue behavior and 99.94% stall avoidance relative to static FPGA execution. Conversely, a different execution setup that has a greater FPGA usage shows a greater queue buildup, an average step time of 0.0330 s, a maximum FPGA queue depth of 77 units, and a high level of congestion exposure, which demonstrates how crucial a queue-aware execution configuration is. These findings underscore the fact that the acceleration capability of the FPGA is not controlled by the raw compute capability but it is controlled by runtime sensitive and contention-sensitive orchestration, creating a principled and reproducible methodology to evaluate heterogeneous training systems in realistic conditions of accelerator sharing. View details Designing Privacy Choice in Generative AI Chatbot Ecosystems Lanjing Liu Xinran Adeline Li Allen Lin Yaxing Yao 2026 Preview Preview abstract Generative AI (GenAI) is evolving from standalone tools to interconnected ecosystems that integrate chatbots, cloud platforms, and third-party services. While this ecosystem model enables personalization and extended services, it also introduces complex information flows and amplifies privacy risks. Existing solutions focus on system-level protections, offering little support for users to make meaningful privacy choices. To address this gap, we conducted two vignette-based survey studies with 486 participants and a followup interview study with 16 participants. We also explored users’ needs and preferences for privacy choice design across both GenAI personalization and data-sharing. Our results reveal paradoxical patterns: participants sometimes trusted third-party ecosystems more for personalization but perceived greater control in first-party ecosystems when data was shared externally. We discuss design implications for privacy choice interfaces that enhance transparency, control, and trust in GenAI ecosystems. View details Large-scale, interpretable gene regulatory network inference through biologically informed matrix factorization Soel Micheletti Viola Fanfani Julia Vogt John Quackenbush Jonas Fischer Alexander Marx Panagiotis Mandros bioRxiv (2026) Preview Preview abstract Gene regulatory networks (GRNs) provide a mechanistic framework for understanding how transcription factors coordinate gene expression to establish cellular identity and phenotype. Methods that integrate gene expression with motif-derived regulatory priors and other sources of biological information have substantially advanced gene regulatory network inference by reconstructing condition-specific regulatory architecture. These approaches estimate the evidence supporting regulatory interactions and have proven remarkably successful in a wide range of biological applications. A complementary view of regulatory networks, however, seeks to estimate the effect of those interactions on gene expression itself, providing a framework in which regulatory edges can be interpreted as activating or inhibitory influences on transcription.

We developed Giraffe, a biologically informed matrix factorization framework that jointly estimates transcription factor activities and gene regulatory networks by integrating gene expression, motif-based regulatory priors, and transcription factor protein-protein interactions. Giraffe estimates signed partial regulatory effects whose magnitude and sign can be interpreted as the strength and direction of transcriptional regulation. Building directly on the biological framework established by methods such as PANDA, Giraffe provides a complementary representation of gene regulatory networks that emphasizes mechanistic interpretation while remaining scalable, flexible, and computationally efficient.

Across synthetic benchmarks, six human tissues, yeast transcription factor perturbation experiments, and liver hepatocellular carcinoma, Giraffe accurately reconstructs regulatory interactions while distinguishing activating from inhibitory regulation with high accuracy. The inferred networks recover known features of tissue-specific regulation, correctly classify regulatory effects in transcription factor perturbation experiments, and identify biologically coherent changes in regulatory programs associated with liver cancer. Together, these results demonstrate that estimating the direction of transcriptional regulation provides a complementary perspective on gene regulatory networks that facilitates biological interpretation and hypothesis generation. View details Analyzing Bytes: Pre-Disassembly Static Binary Analysis Huan Nguyen Soumyakant Priyadarshan ChenCheng Jiang R. Sekar Proceedings of the ACM on Programming Languages, Association for Computing Machinery (2026), pp. 1127-1151 Preview Preview abstract Binary code analysis plays a central role in numerous applications in software security, performance optimization, reverse engineering, and so on. Existing techniques need to first disassemble binaries into functions in assembly code before an analysis can be performed. However, disassembly and function identification have proven to be major challenges for complex variable-length instruction sets such as the x86. A recent trend has been to use static analysis to improve the accuracy of these tasks. This raises a chicken-and-egg problem: a disassembly is needed for static analysis, but a static analysis is needed for accurate disassembly! We overcome this problem by developing a novel static analysis approach that can operate before committing to a disassembly. Our analysis operates on the output of exhaustive disassembly that considers each possible offset in a binary as an instruction, and constructs what is known as a super-set control-flow graph (CFG). The central technical challenge in analyzing this CFG is that it mixes legitimate instructions with unintended ones, causing analysis results from invalid code paths to pollute legitimate ones. To overcome this challenge, we begin with a key new insight that if we focus on backward analyses, we can ensure accuracy of analysis results at intended instructions even though we have no idea where these intended instructions are! Moreover, our analysis operates in time that is linear in the size of the binary. Specifically, in O(n) total time, it yields analysis results for every one of the n offsets in an n-byte binary. For this task, it is orders of magnitude faster than previous techniques, as the previous techniques typically need to repeat the analysis many times. View details 1 2 3 … of 773 of 773 pages Search on Google Scholar Meet the teams driving innovation Our teams advance the state of the art through research, systems engineering, and collaboration across Google. See our teams Follow us Explore our other initiatives Google AI Discover how Google AI is committed to enriching knowledge and solving complex challenges Products Build Research Responsibility Societal Impact About Google Cloud High-performance infrastructure for cloud computing, data analytics & machine learning Overview Solutions Products Pricing Resources Google DeepMind Our mission is to build AI responsibly to benefit humanity Models Research Science About Google Labs Explore the future of AI responsibly with Google Labs About Experiments Stay connected About Google Google Products Privacy Terms Cookies management controls ×
