URL https://arxiv.org/html/2602.06019v1 PARSED_LINES 1734 MAIN_STOP 242
379: A.1 Extended Implementation and Experimental Details
380: Stopping criteria.
381: Similar to KVCaching, the natural generalization of stop-token handling, eg. EOS tokens, from the NTP setting to our MTP model is straightforward but still requires explanation.
382: During training, since we primarily consider instruction following datasets with variable lengths, we have to choose how to train the model to emit an EOS token. Our convention is to treat the first MTP region in which an EOS appears in the ground truth sequence as the determiner of the last MTP region for this sample in the training data. Then, we pad out the sequence with more EOS tokens to fill this last kk token region. Beyond this region, the rest of the context window is filled with padding and ignored completely by the computation and objective.
383: At inference time, we therefore hope that the model has then learned to emit at least one EOS token in the appropriate point in the sequence. During generation, if any of the tokens emitted by the MTP model in a given kk token decoding step are stop-tokens, we simply call this the final step of generation and terminate, trimming off any tokens predicted after the first EOS. We find that this simple setup provides the MTP model the ability to reliably generate long sequences that truncate at logical positions that are also not exact multiples of kk.
384: Pretrained models.
385: Initially we prototyped our approach using the Llama-3.2-1B base checkpoint (Grattafiori et al., 2024) to enable low cost, rapid iteration of our design. Then we upgraded to the Llama-3.1-8B base checkpoint (Grattafiori et al., 2024) to improve overall performance while exploring loss variations and training hyperparameters (Figure 6 is derived from experiments with that model). Finally, based on intuitions that post-trained models generally have lower entropy in their NTP distribution due to training on narrow domains using objectives and datasets that empirically reduce a model’s entropy, we switched to post-trained initial checkpoints for the final set of experiments and ablations. The pair of post-trained initial checkpoints used are Llama-3.1-8B-MagpieAlign-SFT-v0.1 (“L3.1-8B-Magpie” throughout, Xu et al. (2024)) and Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 (“Qwen3-4B-Inst-2507” throughout, Yang et al. (2025)).
386: Finetuning data.
387: In order to target benchmarks involving reasoning traces where inference efficiency is most useful in practice, we train our MTP LMs on a dataset of synthetic grade school math (GSM) problems called MetaMathQA (Yu et al., 2023). The data is a synthetically generated series of GSM problems with reasoning traces and answers built by taking an existing set of previously released, hand-written questions, and augmenting them using a large API based model. We note that this dataset is based on the train split of the official GSM8K dataset only, the official test set questions used for benchmarking are not included or used as seed questions. For our experimentation, we also split the 395k raw rows into subsets for training and validation that are stratified by the unique set of seed questions such that augmentations of a single seed question fall into the train set, or the validation set, but not both.
388: In an ablation, we also consider a more general set of finetuning data: Magpie-Pro-300k-v0.1 and Magpie-Reasoning-150k (“Magpie” hereafter, Xu et al. (2024)). These are also synthetically generated datasets covering a wide range of instruction following and reasoning tasks, but we specifically choose it due to the release of a publicly released model checkpoint that was post-trained directly on these datasets (the aforementioned L3.1-8B-Magpie). We hypothesize that the affinity between the pretrained initialization of the student policy and its ability to rapidly learn the MTP behavior may be linked and so we compare the impact of this training data choice, holding all other settings constant.
389: Chat Templating.
390: Both of the main pretrained models we use come equipped with a chat template. However, preliminary experiments indicated that it was difficult to ensure that our training data and evaluation data was prepared in such a way that the model responded accurately under standard k=1k=1 decoding at the end of training. As a result, we experimented with various combinations before landing on the following configuration. For the L3.1-8B-Magpie model, we apply the chat template included with its tokenizer for all training and evaluation datasets as this performed well. However, for Qwen3-4B-Inst-2507, after experimenting with its chat template and observing poor results, we settled on preparing the training and evaluation data by joining “input” and “response” pairs using just a simple “\n\n” string and prepending a BOS token to every full input. In all tables, the setting for the model is noted under its name.
391: Hyperparameters.
392: In addition to the initialization and training datasets, we adopt a standard set of hyperparameters for elements of the training pipeline not specific to our MTP implementation and objective. We train our models using the AdamW optimizer using PyTorch default settings and a learning rate schedule of 2000 steps of warm-up followed by a constant peak learning rate of 1​e−51e-5; our goal is to keep the model in a “finetuning” regime where the student’s initial capabilities and behaviors are maintained whilst the MTP abilities are acquired. All parameters in the student model are made trainable, while the teacher model remains frozen.
393: As our primary training dataset, MetaMathQA, contains relatively short samples (avg. ∼220\sim 220 tokens under the Llama 3 tokenizer), we cap the overall sequence length (training context window, NN) at 160 tokens for all MetaMathQA runs. For ablations using the Magpie datasets whose average lengths are longer, we use a sequence length of 1024 tokens. For experiments with MetaMathQA, we use a global batch size of 128 sequences across all devices training in data parallel, and for the Magpie dataset experiments we use a global batch size of 16. While not perfectly equivalent, the number of tokens per optimization step is therefore within the same order of magnitude for both experiments. Based on a desire to balance the supervision density of our objective with the length of prefixes that the model is exposed to, we set the number of MTP regions MM in a given sequence during training to be M=N/(2​k)M=N/(2k) as illustrated in Figure 2 (we use the largest kk value 16 as the value when choosing MM, eg. M=N/(2​km​a​x)M=N/(2k_{max})).
394: For implementation simplicity, while the offset and kk value are randomized during training MM is left fixed meaning that all sampled values of offset and kk produce a lower number of supervised positions per (eg. the sum of the “Pred:” row in Figure 2) than the maximum which is when the offset is 0 and the sampled kk is the maximum. We use a batch size of 128 sequences for the models trained on MetaMathQA, and a batch size of 16 for the models trained on the Magpie datasets. While not scaled exactly, due to the >5×>5\times larger sequence length for the latter, the reduced batch size still achieves in the same order of magnitude number of tokens per optimization step. Over the course of approximately 100k training iterations, for the MetaMathQA models based on the setting of M=N/(2​km​a​x)M=N/(2k_{max}), this equates to an upper bound of 1B supervised tokens if assuming a fixed value k=km​a​xk=k_{max} and an offset of 0. Since 160/(2∗16)=5160/(2*16)=5 regions, we have 100​e​3∗128∗(5∗16)​1.024​e​9100e3*128*(5*16)1.024e9 tokens. For the actual runs under randomization, in expectation the kk value is closer to half of the max, so our models only see a total of 500M supervised tokens.
395: However, as illustrated in Figure 2, more tokens of raw input are required as input at each step than are actually supervised if kk is randomized following the static MM setting described above. As there are about 50M tokens available in the MetaMathQA dataset assuming the Llama 3 tokenizer and a truncation length of 160, this results in ∼35\sim 35 epochs of training for the L3.1-8B-Magpie based model. While early experiments indicate that overfitting is possible at more extreme durations, due to the offset and kk value randomization strategies, the number of unique batches of prefix and MTP prediction problems in a dataset with DD rows is actually >D>D. These additional views of the same sample—approximately proportional to the unique combinations of block offset and kk possible under a given set of hyperparameters—likely make the effective number of epochs on the same exact batch of prepared and masked inputs much lower, if not close to just 1. We believe that the result of transfer learning from MetaMathQA to benchmarks beyond GSM8K also suggest that overfitting isn’t necessarily an issue in our specific experimental settings.
396: The main models containing 8B and 4B parameters are both trainable at the settings described using one node of 4×\timesGH200 GPUs using FSDP based model and data parallelism. The training runs to 100k steps take approximately 24-36 hours of continuous runtime depending on the model. Each benchmark evaluation can be performed on a single GH200 GPU and runtime varies depending on the specific settings of kk, the size and average response length for the benchmark itself.
397: Evaluation metrics and benchmarks.
398: During early experimentation, we used our held out validation subset of MetaMathQA to track metrics like confidence and quality of the student roll outs under the teacher (as in Figure 6). Then, for a comprehensive evaluation of our main models we selected a series of mathematical and general instruction following benchmark datasets from the Eleuther LM Evaluation Harness (Gao et al., 2024). We specifically chose the following set of generative benchmarks to test the technical and long form generation capabilities of our MTP LMs: GSM8K, AIME25, GPQA, BBH, IFEVAL, and CNN DailyMail. We refer the reader to the harness repo and each respective dataset’s documentation for a detailed descriptions of each but we list the specific used settings in the evaluation harness below.
399: GSM8K CoT Fewshot is evaluated with an additional “Lets think step by step” suffix to the prompt, with output truncation after emission of ``Q:'' or any of the model’s stop tokens. We report the “flexible-extract” accuracy metric and its Std. Error.
400: AIME25 is evaluated with output truncation after emission of any of the model’s stop tokens. We report the “exact-match” accuracy metric and its Std. Error.
401: GPQA Main CoT Fewshot is evaluated with output truncation after emission of any of the model’s stop tokens. We report the “flexible-extract” accuracy metric and its Std. Error.
402: Big Bench Hard CoT Fewshot is evaluated with output truncation after emission of ``\\n\\n'', ``Q:'', or any of the model’s stop tokens. We report the exact-match accuracy metric and its Std. Error under the “get-answer” extraction method.
403: IFEval is evaluated with output truncation after emission of ``Q:'' or any of the model’s stop tokens. We report the “Prompt-level” exact-match accuracy metric and its Std. Error.
404: CNN DailyMail Summarization is evaluated with output truncation after emission of any of the model’s stop tokens. We report the ROUGE-L performance metric and its Std. Error.
405: A.2 Extended Results
406: A.3 Quality vs. Confidence Correlation
407: Figure 6: The correlation between student confidence and generation quality for a preliminary experiment where we train a Llama-3.1-8B Base model on generic webtext under our MTP objective. We evaluate the quality of its completions to prefixes in a validation set (loss under the teacher model, lower is better) and correlate this against the student’s confidence in its own generations (avg. probability assigned to top token in all kk positions). The correlation between confidence and quality allows us to design a simple adaptive decoding strategy that limits the number of tokens sampled if the model is not sufficiently confident at any point during the generation process.
