URL https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.05437v1

PAGE 15 
 are not .
Output Format ( JSON ) :
{
" multiple - choice ": {
" question_en ": "..." ,
" options_en ": ["..." , "..." , "..."] ,
" co rr ec t_ an swe r_ en ": "..." ,
" rationale ": "..." ,
" cognitive_focus ": "..." ,
" semantic_focus ": ["..." , "..."]
}
}
Counterfactual Curation Prompt: We use the
following system prompt to convert each multiple-
choice question (MCQ) into a contrastive true/false
format. This prompt performs only a deterministic
conversion of MCQ answer options into declarative
statements and does not introduce new content.
You are an AI assistant .
Your task is to convert a filtered
multiple - choice question ( MCQ )
into a set of declarative true and false
statements .
Input :
- One multiple - choice question ( MCQ )
- Three answer options
- The correct answer
Instructions :
1. Rewrite each answer option as a
standalone declarative statement
referring to the image .
2. From this conversion , produce :
- One TRUE statement ( Q +) , derived
from the correct answer option .
- Two FALSE statements (Q -) , derived
from the incorrect answer options
.
3. Preserve the semantic content of each
answer option .
4. Remove explicit question structure .
5. Do not introduce new entities or
additional information .
Output Format ( JSON ) :
{
" Q_plus ": "..." ,
" Q_minus ": ["..." , "..."]
}
A.3 Prompting Strategies
We evaluated models using three ﬁxed prompt
templates (Table 3) that differ in the timing and
structure of reasoning relative to the ﬁnal decision.
Prompt A (True or False) requires the model to
directly predict whether a statement is true or false
with respect to the image, without providing any
Figure 6: Example image used to illustrate the prompt
templates in Table 3.
justiﬁcation. Prompt B (Answer then Reason) re-
quires the model to ﬁrst commit to a binary decision
and then provide supporting evidence grounded in
the image. Prompt C (Reasoning First) reverses
this order by eliciting explicit reasoning steps prior
to the ﬁnal true/false decision. Each prompt is in-
stantiated in four language variants: English (EN),
Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), Levantine Arabic
(AJP), and Egyptian Arabic (ARZ), using semanti-
cally equivalent instructions and strictly enforced
output formats to ensure consistent parsing across
models and languages. For all settings, only the
ﬁnal binary decision is used for scoring; any output
that does not match the required format is treated
as incorrect. This controlled prompting setup al-
lows us to isolate the effect of reasoning order and
linguistic variation on counterfactual hallucination
behavior.
A.4 Qualitative Analysis of Reasoning-First
Prompting
Table 4 provides qualitative examples that illus-
trate the mechanisms underlying the quantitative
trends reported in RQ4. In all three cases, the
model produces the ground-truth judgment under
Prompt B (Answer then Reason ), but reverses its
decision under Prompt C (Reasoning First), despite
correctly perceiving the relevant visual evidence in
both settings. These examples highlight how elicit-
ing reasoning prior to commitment can introduce
additional constraints that are not required by the
task and are not supported by the image.
In the doll example , the model under Prompt
C correctly identiﬁes the presence of a metallic
pitcher and an orange-colored component, but sub-
sequently reframes the task by imposing a stricter
semantic interpretation of object individuation. By
reasoning that the orange element is attached to the

PAGE 17 
 ported statements. In contrast, committing to an
answer prior to justiﬁcation appears to anchor the
models decision to image-grounded evidence, with
subsequent reasoning serving primarily to rational-
ize rather than reinterpret the judgment.
These qualitative ﬁndings support the quantita-
tive results in RQ4, demonstrating that the timing
of evidence elicitation plays a critical role in coun-
terfactual hallucination. Reasoning is beneﬁcial
only when it follows an initial commitment; when
elicited beforehand, it can systematically amplify
semantic over-interpretation and reliance on cul-
tural or conceptual priors at the expense of visual
grounding.
A.5 Effect of Scaling on Hallucination
In the main paper (Figure 4), we showed that
counterfactual hallucination generally decreases as
model size increases under the direct true/false set-
ting (Prompt A), with Qwen3-VL beneﬁting more
from scaling than Gemma-3-VL, particularly in
Arabic. Figures 7 in the appendix show the corre-
sponding results for Prompt B (Answer then Rea-
son) and Prompt C (Reasoning First).
Across both prompts, we observe the same over-
all pattern: larger models tend to hallucinate less,
scaling effects are stronger in MSA and dialectal
Arabic than in English, and Qwen3-VL shows more
consistent gains from increased model size than
Gemma-3-VL. While Prompt C leads to higher
hallucination rates overall, especially for smaller
models, scaling still results in clear reductions in
CFHR. Together, these results show that the scal-
ing trends reported in the main paper hold across
different prompting and reasoning setups.
In Figures 8, we report scaling results separately
for Egyptian (AJP) and Levantine (ARZ) Arabic
under Prompts A–C. Across all prompts, coun-
terfactual hallucination generally decreases with
model size in both dialects, with stronger and more
consistent gains for Qwen3-VL than for Gemma-
3-VL. For Qwen, CFHR drops steadily as scale
increases and the gap between AJP and ARZ nar-
rows at larger sizes, indicating improved robustness
to dialectal variation. In contrast, Gemma-3-VL
shows persistently higher CFHR with limited scal-
ing beneﬁts and near-identical behavior across the
two dialects. Prompt B consistently reduces hal-
lucination relative to Prompt A, while Prompt C
increases CFHR at smaller scales, though scaling
still yields clear improvements. Overall, these re-
sults conﬁrm that the scaling trends reported in the
main paper for averaged dialects also hold at the
level of individual Arabic dialects.
A.6 Sample Images
Figures 9 and 10 show representative samples
from the M 2CQA dataset, illustrating the breadth
of visual content and the contrastive question de-
sign used throughout the benchmark. Each image
is paired with one visually grounded true state-
ment (Q +) and two culturally plausible but visu-
ally unsupported counterfactual statements (Q −),
presented in both English and Modern Standard
Arabic (MSA).
The examples span a wide range of everyday and
culturally salient scenes, including objects, peo-
ple, architecture, public spaces, religious artifacts,
landmarks, marketplaces, and festive settings com-
monly encountered in the MENA region. Counter-
factual questions are designed to be semantically
and culturally reasonable while remaining veriﬁ-
ably incorrect given the visual evidence.
These sample images illustrate the central chal-
lenge targeted by M 2CQA: distinguishing visually
grounded interpretations from culturally familiar
but unsupported alternatives. They highlight why
accurate visual grounding is necessary to avoid
hallucinations driven by strong cultural or contex-
tual priors, motivating the evaluation framework
introduced in the main body.
A.7 Human V eriﬁcation
Figure 11 shows the annotation interface used for
human veriﬁcation in our image-based QA task.
Annotators are presented with a single image and
a small set of associated question–answer (Q/A)
pairs derived from that image. Each Q/A pair is
evaluated independently along two annotation di-
mensions. First, annotators label Q/A correct-
ness, indicating whether the provided answer is
supported by clearly observable visual evidence in
the image ( Correct, Incorrect, or Unsure). Second,
annotators indicate whether answering the question
requires access to the image (Needs Image: Y es, No,
or Unsure). These two labels are explicitly inde-
pendent: a Q/A pair may be visually grounded yet
incorrect, or correct but answerable without access
to the image.
Annotators are instructed to mark answers as
Incorrect whenever visual evidence is absent, con-
tradictory, irrelevant to the image, or requires ex-
ternal knowledge not directly inferable from the
image alone. The Unsure label is reserved strictly

PAGE 18 
 (a) Prompt B (Answer then Reason)
 (b) Prompt C (Reasoning First)
Figure 7: Scaling and counterfactual hallucination across prompting strategies. Counterfactual Hallucination
Rate (CFHR; lower is better) as a function of model size for Qwen3-VL (solid) and Gemma-3-VL (dotted),
evaluated in English (EN), Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), and dialectal Arabic (Dialects; average of Egyptian and
Levantine). Prompt B requires models to answer before providing justiﬁcation, while Prompt C elicits reasoning
prior to the ﬁnal answer.
for cases of genuine visual ambiguity (e.g., severe
blur, occlusion, or insufﬁcient resolution), and is
discouraged when the image clearly fails to sup-
port the claim. The example shown in Figure 11
illustrates a visually grounded true statement (Q +)
alongside visually checkable but incorrect counter-
factual statements (Q −). This interface design sup-
ports ﬁne-grained quality control by distinguishing
failures of visual grounding from annotation un-
certainty, while ensuring that counterfactual state-
ments remain plausible yet veriﬁably unsupported
by the image.
We annotated a small subset of the dataset con-
sisting of 1321 samples for human veriﬁcation.
Due to budget constraints, each item was anno-
tated by two annotators. Annotators were hired
through a third-party provider and compensated
at the standard hourly rate for their location. All
annotators were professionals ﬂuent in both Arabic
and English and held at least a bachelor’s degree.
Each annotator signed a non-disclosure agreement
(NDA) specifying all permitted uses of the data.
To quantify inter-annotator reliability, we com-
pute agreement using Gwets AC1 (Gwet, 2008) for
nominal categories. AC1 provides a stable chance-
corrected estimate under conditions of high agree-
ment and skewed label distributions and is less
sensitive to prevalence effects than commonly used
alternatives such as Cohens κ or Krippendorffs α.
Agreement is computed separately for each annota-
tion task and question type.
Table 6 reports inter-annotator agreement for
both annotation dimensions. Agreement for Needs
Image is consistently high across all questions
(AC1 ≈ 0.99), indicating reliable identiﬁcation
of whether a question requires visual grounding.
Agreement for Q−Correctness is lower but con-
sistent (average AC1 = 0.56), reﬂecting the ﬁner-
grained visual judgments involved and the presence
of genuine visual ambiguity. Modest variation is
observed across questions, with Q1 exhibiting the
highest correctness agreement and Q3 the lowest .
A.8 Translation Quality
We assess translation quality using a combination
of automatic and human evaluation to ensure that
both Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) and dialectal
Arabic variants are suitable for use in our multilin-
gual and multimodal experiments.
A.8.1 Automatic Evaluation
As part of the data construction pipeline, Modern
Standard Arabic (MSA) variants are produced us-
ing an in-house English-to-MSA translation sys-
tem, while dialectal Arabic variants are generated
via direct English-to-dialect translation using GPT-
4.1. To assess the quality of dialectal translations,
we conduct automatic evaluations using BLEU on
standard dialectal test sets.
Table 7 reports BLEU scores for direct English-
to-dialect translation across Levantine and Egyp-
tian Arabic. Performance varies across test sets, re-
ﬂecting known differences in domain, orthographic
conventions, and the inherent difﬁculty of dialectal
Arabic translation. While BLEU scores are modest,
they are consistent with prior observations in the
literature and indicate that GPT-4.1 produces trans-

