[p] Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:
[h1] Safe Vision Language Action Models via Barrier Enhanced Flow Matching
[p] This article presents a modular inference framework that integrates models with formal Control Barrier Function (CBF) safety guarantees. Unlike existing methods that apply external safety filters to a model’s final output, our approach modifies the Flow Matching denoising process within the model to inherently generate safe trajectories. By employing a smooth Log-Sum-Exponential aggregate barrier, we enforce safety over entire action chunks. We show that, within the proposed framework, the 2-Wasserstein distance between the generated distribution and the target distribution remains bounded. Our method eliminates the need for safety-specific datasets or costly model retraining, providing a versatile solution for safe that our framework achieves reliable safety without degrading the success rate of the model.
[p] Large behavioral models have revolutionized robotics, driven by rapid advances in transformers , Vision-Language Models (VLM), Diffusion Policies , multi-modal datasets , and open-source robot trajectory datasets . Generalist robotic policies are no longer far-fetched, as state-of-the-art methods can perform complex robotic manipulation and locomotion tasks using only inference from fine-tuned foundation models . Researchers have addressed challenges such as inference time, vision–action–language integration, robustness, and low success rates to develop novel architectures for robot control policies. Early efforts focused on imitation learning, leveraging large datasets tailored to specific robots and tasks. Subsequent work with action chunking transformers (ACT) and diffusion policies significantly improved both performance and model architecture. More recently, Vision-Language-Action (VLA) models have been introduced to the robotics community and rapidly adopted by researchers and engineers developing robots that tackle complex real-world tasks. In addition to improved performance, the size of these newer open-source models has decreased substantially. For instance, the closed-source RT-2-X , one of the earlier models, has 55B parameters, whereas OpenVLA, introduced in 2024, reduced the policy size to 7B parameters , and SmolVLA , introduced in 2025, further reduced it to 550M parameters, making it lightweight enough that contemporary portable computers can handle both fine-tuning and inference.
[p] Modern VLAs like Physical Intelligence and SmolVLA consist of two transformers with separate sets of weights, connected via a block-wise causal attention mask. The first set of transformer weights belongs to a conventional VLM, which provides strong semantic and visual understanding of the image and language inputs, while the second set of transformer weights is a smaller model called the Action Expert (AE). The action expert is essentially a subset of the model’s weights that is responsible for processing the system’s proprioceptive states and generating action chunks. Chen et al. proposed a flow matching algorithm as an optimized denoising procedure to be used for generation; this algorithm reduces the number of denoising steps and makes real-time, high-frequency inference possible. This architecture provides an effective foundation model that takes both language tokens and camera frames as input to generate control actions for robots in real time.
[p] In the literature of control systems, a control design problem that has safety constraints or metrics on top of its tracking or stability requirements is considered a safety-critical control problem . The main focus of nonlinear system design is the stability of the states and developing a formal proof for its robust convergence to a specific target state. Safety controllers were proposed later on to address the problem of safety-critical control design. Control barrier functions (CBF) are one of the most common tools for designing safety filters in the control engineering community . CBFs provide a formal guarantee of safety through set invariance theorems and are compatible with different control practices such as robust control, adaptive control , and . Despite their advantages, enforcing safety via CBF has its own caveats. CBFs require a decent knowledge of the system model, and they usually result in conservative controllers. Researchers have addressed these challenges to introduce more flexibility into the CBF implementation and broaden its applications. Nowadays, we see different variations of CBF applied to with acceptable conservative management. This makes the CBF a practical solution for enforcing safety on VLA policies.
[p] Researchers are attempting to integrate different safety filters with Yang et al. attempted to integrate Finite-Time Convergence CBF into the flow matching process and showed some promising results with flow matching planners. Hu et al. proposed to filter the VLA output using a quadratic program that enforces the CBF constraint. Zhang et al. tried to bridge the gap between some of the existing safe reinforcement learning (safe RL) methods and also extended the benchmark problems to VLAs by addressing the requirements for photorealistic simulations. They showed that a safe VLA architecture could increase both the safe operation rate and the task success rate of the model.
[p] VLAs, despite their capabilities in generating trajectories for complex and abstract tasks such as tabletop operation, pick and place, cleaning, and laundry folding, are not yet fully integrated with safety-critical control. In this work, we develop a method that seamlessly bridges the gap between VLA policies and classical control safety guarantees, so that the resulting agent benefits simultaneously from the complex task planning and control capabilities of VLAs and the safety guarantees of CBFs. The main contributions of this work are summarized as follows:
[p] Integrating CBF with the generative policy by modifying the FM inference.
[p] In this work, we focus on enforcing safety for modern VLAs that use Flow Matching for the generative process. These models consist of an Action Expert (AE) and a VLM backbone . The VLA transformer is trained on data sets containing language input, high-frequency image frames, and the robot’s proprioceptive feedback (e.g., joint positions). The generative process to approximate a flow velocity that transforms some known distribution into the distribution of dataset . The deterministic continuous flow that transforms to is denoted by and the corresponding vector-field is denoted by . We use for referring to the space of generated samples. The following ordinary differential equation (ODE) describes the denoising process .
[p] Herein, is the denoising time where corresponds to the noisy sample drawn randomly from a normal distribution or a beta distribution and is the smooth denoised action chunk. deriving the true vector-field explicitly is , so its approximation with parameter is used instead.
[p] system with state vector is modeled with the following ODE.
[p] This equation represents a control-affine nonlinear system where both and are assumed to be Lipschitz continuous functions and is the input of the system. According to the nonlinear control theorems , if the control input remains Lipschitz continuous, then for any the system has a unique solution for all . The system under control is considered safe with respect to the safe set if holds true for all . In the control barrier function literature, the safe set is defined as the 0-superlevel set of a continuously differentiable function as shown below.
[p] CBFs serve as forward invariance certificates according to Theorem . Control engineers use CBF to formulate quadratic programs (QP) that generate safe control inputs .
[p] Various modifications to CBF allow for model-free safety control of systems . In this section, we will formulate a plug-and-play safety filter that could be used as an external filter that modifies generated trajectories before sending them to the robot’s low-level controller as the reference input. Consider we have a position-controlled robotic system with an asymptotically stable position controller.
[p] where is the safe position generated by the filter, is the desired , . The safety filter of () is computationally fast and could be applied to the actions drawn from the action queue of a synchronous or asynchronous inference loop. Although effective at safety enforcement, this method is highly susceptible to the performance of the tracking controller. Some restrictions apply to the choice of parameter , which are critical to the safety of the system .
[p] In this study, we propose and evaluate a barrier-enhanced flow matching process to be used in place of () such that it enforces some safety constraint through barrier function quadratic programs (QP). The first challenge of integrating CBFs with flow matching is the lack of a system model, so we are looking into approaches towards implementing CBF . We also need to address how to define barrier functions for action chunks. Safety description and safe set () are regularly defined on the system’s state, not a trajectory; this complicates the already challenging problem of crafting barrier functions for arbitrary safety descriptions.
[p] Herein, generated action chunks with size are denoted by , and are individual joint space goal positions. Our goal is to develop a filter that enforces safety on the entire generated trajectory without destabilizing the overall denoising flow .
[p] The state space of () is defined on the robot’s state , not an entire trajectory (e.g. action chunk ). Before proceeding to the safety filter design, we need to demonstrate a systematic approach towards defining the barrier function for the action chunk that allows fast computation and efficient implementation. First, we extend the safety notion from a single action to an action chunk by the following definition.
[p] The main challenge with defining CBF using () is that the operator does not necessarily produce a barrier function . On top of the continuity problem, the barrier function composed of all states of the trajectory might end up being highly nonconvex and have a complex explicit form. Instead of defining the barrier function using the min operator, we utilize the smooth log-sum-exponential function () to combine and smooth the resulting barrier function, which represents an approximated safe action chunk. Note that we flatten action chunk to make the dimensions of the equations consistent through QP formulation and denote the flattened by .
[p] The smoothing parameter could be any positive real value. .
[p] Proof of this theorem can be found in the appendix of , which utilizes the monotonicity property of the function.
[p] For implementation purposes, we calculate the partial derivative of () with respect to flattened action chunk by:
[p] where we have used for ease of notation. Note that is the gradient of the barrier function with respect to the robot’s state . Now, with this definition of safety for action chunks () and the smooth log-sum-exponent approximation formula for deriving the barrier function (), we can proceed to formulating the CBF for the flow matching.
[p] Recall the flow matching equation (); in this section, we modify this equation by introducing an additional term to the original ODE. The main purpose of this variable is to make minimal adjustments such that the action chunk is safe according to Definition . This objective could be formulated as a QP that is constrained by the control barrier function inequality.
[p] Inspired by the CBF QP, we first propose the following optimization problem for finding the optimal value of .
[p] Since we flattened the action chunk in the previous section, we also use a flattened equivalent vector of in the QP () and denote it with . The original form could be recovered from the flattened vector. The optimization problem () is feasible as long as the safe set defined by is non-empty and its solution could be obtained by applying the Karush–Kuhn–Tucker (KKT) conditions :
[p] Benton et al. studied the error bound of and found an upper bound on Wasserstein distance under some assumptions on the approximation error and certain regularity conditions. This bound is dependent on the quality of the approximated and its Lipschitz continuity (Theorems 1-3 of ). Assume that our is , while is a known distribution (e.g., Normal or Beta). that transforms the initial known distribution to the target distribution is such that if we take a sample , then the distribution of is approximately . is denoted by . The following assumptions are required for deriving an error bound on the 2-Wasserstein distance of and .
[p] The first assumption gives us an upper bound on the approximation error of the , which is not restrictive for VLA generative frameworks. Assumption is required for the existence and uniqueness of the solutions to ODE (). The approximator could also be trained in a manner that satisfies the local Lipschitz condition of Assumption .
[p] satisfies Assumptions - with slightly inflated bounds such that the Wasserstein distance between and remains bounded.
[p] Benton et al. discussed that if the target distribution has some nice regularity conditions, the bound () could become linear in terms of the Lipschitz constant.
[p] Theorem provides a critical intuition over the choice of (See Figure )
[p] velocity limits to the generated trajectory is possible by adding more constraints to the QP (). This trajectory will be passed to the low-level controllers of the robot for execution and real-time control, so by limiting the velocity on the generated trajectory , we cannot guarantee the joint angular velocity at the hardware level. However, this will significantly increase the quality and smoothness of the generated action chunks. To formulate this constraint, we use the sparse matrix that facilitates the derivation of finite difference joint velocities within a flattened action chunk:
[p] The identity matrix of size is denoted by . Note that the , multiplied by the block diagonal matrix , is the physical sampling time of the robot, which is different from the sampling time used in denoising . This parameter is inversely related to the frame rate of the VLA. We can use the sparse matrix to also add a smoothing objective to the cost function of () such that it minimizes the difference between consecutive actions. The final form of barrier-enhanced flow matching QP is shown below.
[p] We use the weighted sum of the two quadratic terms in () with parameter , which is a tunable positive real number. The first term of the cost function minimizes the safety filter adjustments to the flow based on the activation of the CBF constraint, while the second term improves the smoothness of the generated action chunk. Fig. shows an example of successful velocity limit enforcement with the additional constraints. Note that QP () is solvable in real-time and does not cause computation burden during inference.
[p] We can use this barrier function to restrict the placement of one frame (mostly end effector) from passing a 3-dimensional plane. For instance, we can use this barrier function to stop the robot from pushing its tool against its surrounding surfaces, like a table or walls. Assume the normal vector of the safe set boundary is a plane with normal vector , having an offset of from the origin. The following barrier function can be used for keeping a specific robot frame on one side of the plane (e.g. Fig. ):
[p] where denotes the vector dot product, is the Jacobian of the arm for configuration , and is the Cartesian position of the end effector.
[p] If the user wants to keep one of the robot’s frames outside the spherical region, we can formulate a barrier function based on the frame’s proximity to the region’s center () by the following barier function:
[p] An example of this barrier is shown in Fig. . These barrier function candidates are mentioned as an example; the framework is compatible with other safety descriptions tailored for a wide variety of applications, such as multi-agent robotic systems , mobile robots , and autonomous vehicles if they comply with assumptions of Theorem .
[p] We fine-tuned the pretrained model for a pick and place task using the SO-101 5 degrees of freedom (DoF) robotic arm with a two-finger gripper. A dataset of roughly 150 teleoperated trials, totaling 84k frames at 30 FPS, was used for the training process.
[p] Our proposed inference filter presented in Algorithm is implemented via modification of the open source model from . Safety rate and success rate of the framework are measured simultaneously in experiments where placed inside and outside of the safe region during each trial. During each of the rollouts, we did one of the following:
[p] The object is initially in the unsafe region and will be moved outside after a while. Ideally, the VLA is expected to hesitate grasping it when it is not safe and complete the task when it is moved to the safe region.
[p] the measured safety rate and success rates are reported in Table . We can see that the barrier-enhanced flow matching is reliably generating safe trajectories without degrading the success rate of the base model. Additionally, the smoothing cost and joint velocity constraints in the QP () yield noticeably smoother, less jerky motions.
[h2] References
[h2] Instructions for reporting errors
[p] We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the methods listed below:
[li] Click the "Report Issue" button, located in the page header.
[p] You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.
[p] Our team has already identified . We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for all.
[p] Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a , and welcome .
