https://arxiv.org/api/NDEfh19yF9I/AhCtmRtsoEsl8kM
arXiv Query: search_query=(cat:cs.CL OR cat:cs.LG) AND (ti:language OR ti:transformer OR ti:foundation OR ti:MoE) AND submittedDate:"202510180100 TO 202510190100"&id_list=&start=0&max_results=25
2026-10-05T02:38:54Z
25
23
0
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16290v1
Cerberus: Real-Time Video Anomaly Detection via Cascaded Vision-Language Models
2025-10-18T01:27:23Z
Video anomaly detection (VAD) has rapidly advanced by recent development of Vision-Language Models (VLMs). While these models offer superior zero-shot detection capabilities, their immense computational cost and unstable visual grounding performance hinder real-time deployment. To overcome these challenges, we introduce Cerberus, a two-stage cascaded system designed for efficient yet accurate real-time VAD. Cerberus learns normal behavioral rules offline, and combines lightweight filtering with fine-grained VLM reasoning during online inference. The performance gains of Cerberus come from two key innovations: motion mask prompting and rule-based deviation detection. The former directs the VLM's attention to regions relevant to motion, while the latter identifies anomalies as deviations from learned norms rather than enumerating possible anomalies. Extensive evaluations on four datasets show that Cerberus on average achieves 57.68 fps on an NVIDIA L40S GPU, a 151.79$\times$ speedup, and 97.2\% accuracy comparable to the state-of-the-art VLM-based VAD methods, establishing it as a practical solution for real-time video analytics.
2025-10-18T01:27:23Z
Yue Zheng
Xiufang Shi
Jiming Chen
Yuanchao Shu
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16292v1
QSVD: Efficient Low-rank Approximation for Unified Query-Key-Value Weight Compression in Low-Precision Vision-Language Models
2025-10-18T01:31:14Z
Vision-Language Models (VLMs) are integral to tasks such as image captioning and visual question answering, but their high computational cost, driven by large memory footprints and processing time, limits their scalability and real-time applicability. In this work, we propose leveraging Singular-Value Decomposition (SVD) over the joint query (Q), key (K), and value (V) weight matrices to reduce KV cache size and computational overhead. We in addition introduce an efficient rank allocation strategy that dynamically adjusts the SVD rank based on its impact on VLM accuracy, achieving a significant reduction in both memory usage and computational cost. Finally, we extend this approach by applying quantization to both VLM weights and activations, resulting in a highly efficient VLM. Our method outperforms previous approaches that rely solely on quantization or SVD by achieving more than $10\%$ accuracy improvement while consuming less hardware cost, making it better for real-time deployment on resource-constrained devices. We open source our code at \href{https://github.com/SAI-Lab-NYU/QSVD}{\texttt{https://github.com/SAI-Lab-NYU/QSVD}}.
2025-10-18T01:31:14Z
Accepted as Spotlight paper by NeurIPS 2025
Yutong Wang
Haiyu Wang
Sai Qian Zhang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16340v2
Thinking About Thinking: Evaluating Reasoning in Post-Trained Language Models
2026-04-28T15:07:22Z
Recent advances in post-training techniques have endowed Large Language Models (LLMs) with enhanced capabilities for tackling complex, logic-intensive tasks through the generation of supplementary planning tokens. This development raises a fundamental question: Are these models aware of what they "learn" and "think"? To address this, we define three core competencies: (1) awareness of learned latent policies, (2) generalization of these policies across domains, and (3) alignment between internal reasoning traces and final outputs. We empirically evaluate these abilities on several tasks, each designed to require learning a distinct policy. Furthermore, we contrast the profiles of models post-trained via Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT), Direct Policy Optimization (DPO), and Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO). Our findings indicate that RL-trained models not only demonstrate greater awareness of their learned behaviors and stronger generalizability to novel, structurally similar tasks than SFT models but also often exhibit weak alignment between their reasoning traces and final outputs, an effect most pronounced in GRPO-trained models.
2025-10-18T03:57:32Z
Pratham Singla
Shivank Garg
Ayush Singh
Ishan Garg
Ketan Suhaas Saichandran
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16356v1
Sparse Transformer Architectures via Regularized Wasserstein Proximal Operator with $L_1$ Prior
2025-10-18T05:26:13Z
In this work, we propose a sparse transformer architecture that incorporates prior information about the underlying data distribution directly into the transformer structure of the neural network. The design of the model is motivated by a special optimal transport problem, namely the regularized Wasserstein proximal operator, which admits a closed-form solution and turns out to be a special representation of transformer architectures. Compared with classical flow-based models, the proposed approach improves the convexity properties of the optimization problem and promotes sparsity in the generated samples. Through both theoretical analysis and numerical experiments, including applications in generative modeling and Bayesian inverse problems, we demonstrate that the sparse transformer achieves higher accuracy and faster convergence to the target distribution than classical neural ODE-based methods.
2025-10-18T05:26:13Z
Fuqun Han
Stanley Osher
Wuchen Li
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16357v1
MLCPD: A Unified Multi-Language Code Parsing Dataset with Universal AST Schema
2025-10-18T05:31:14Z
We introduce the MultiLang Code Parser Dataset (MLCPD), a large-scale, language-agnostic dataset unifying syntactic and structural representations of code across ten major programming languages. MLCPD contains over seven million parsed source files normalized under our proposed universal Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) schema, enabling consistent cross-language reasoning, structural learning, and multilingual software analysis. Unlike existing corpora that focus purely on token-level code or isolated parsers, MLCPD provides both hierarchical tree representations and rich metadata for every file, ensuring lossless syntactic coverage and structural uniformity. Each entry includes a normalized schema, language-level metadata, and abstracted node semantics stored in Parquet format for scalable retrieval. Empirical analyses reveal strong cross-language structural regularities-demonstrating that syntactic graphs from languages as diverse as Python, Java, and Go can be aligned under a shared schema. We release the dataset publicly on Hugging Face and the accompanying codebase on GitHub, which includes complete pipelines for dataset reproduction, grammar compilation, and a visualization tool for exploring the unified AST across languages. Together, these resources establish MLCPD as an open, reproducible foundation for future research in cross-language representation learning and program analysis.
2025-10-18T05:31:14Z
12 pages, 7 figures, 4 tables, 2 algorithms, and 34 references. HuggingFace: https://huggingface.co/datasets/jugalgajjar/MultiLang-Code-Parser-Dataset GitHub: https://github.com/JugalGajjar/MultiLang-Code-Parser-Dataset
Jugal Gajjar
Kamalasankari Subramaniakuppusamy
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16359v1
Utilising Large Language Models for Generating Effective Counter Arguments to Anti-Vaccine Tweets
2025-10-18T05:44:39Z
In an era where public health is increasingly influenced by information shared on social media, combatting vaccine skepticism and misinformation has become a critical societal goal. Misleading narratives around vaccination have spread widely, creating barriers to achieving high immunisation rates and undermining trust in health recommendations. While efforts to detect misinformation have made significant progress, the generation of real time counter-arguments tailored to debunk such claims remains an insufficiently explored area. In this work, we explore the capabilities of LLMs to generate sound counter-argument rebuttals to vaccine misinformation. Building on prior research in misinformation debunking, we experiment with various prompting strategies and fine-tuning approaches to optimise counter-argument generation. Additionally, we train classifiers to categorise anti-vaccine tweets into multi-labeled categories such as concerns about vaccine efficacy, side effects, and political influences allowing for more context aware rebuttals. Our evaluation, conducted through human judgment, LLM based assessments, and automatic metrics, reveals strong alignment across these methods. Our findings demonstrate that integrating label descriptions and structured fine-tuning enhances counter-argument effectiveness, offering a promising approach for mitigating vaccine misinformation at scale.
2025-10-18T05:44:39Z
14 pages, 1 figure, work done as a part of B.Tech project at IIT Kharagpur
Utsav Dhanuka
Soham Poddar
Saptarshi Ghosh
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.18890v1
Small Language Models Offer Significant Potential for Science Community
2025-10-18T07:25:05Z
Recent advancements in natural language processing, particularly with large language models (LLMs), are transforming how scientists engage with the literature. While the adoption of LLMs is increasing, concerns remain regarding potential information biases and computational costs. Rather than LLMs, I developed a framework to evaluate the feasibility of precise, rapid, and cost-effective information retrieval from extensive geoscience literature using freely available small language models (MiniLMs). A curated corpus of approximately 77 million high-quality sentences, extracted from 95 leading peer-reviewed geoscience journals such as Geophysical Research Letters and Earth and Planetary Science Letters published during years 2000 to 2024, was constructed. MiniLMs enable a computationally efficient approach for extracting relevant domain-specific information from these corpora through semantic search techniques and sentence-level indexing. This approach, unlike LLMs such as ChatGPT-4 that often produces generalized responses, excels at identifying substantial amounts of expert-verified information with established, multi-disciplinary sources, especially for information with quantitative findings. Furthermore, by analyzing emotional tone via sentiment analysis and topical clusters through unsupervised clustering within sentences, MiniLM provides a powerful tool for tracking the evolution of conclusions, research priorities, advancements, and emerging questions within geoscience communities. Overall, MiniLM holds significant potential within the geoscience community for applications such as fact and image retrievals, trend analyses, contradiction analyses, and educational purposes.
2025-10-18T07:25:05Z
Jian Zhang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16380v2
MoReBench: Evaluating Procedural and Pluralistic Moral Reasoning in Language Models, More than Outcomes
2026-06-10T21:26:48Z
As AI systems progress, we rely more on them to make decisions with us and for us. To ensure that such decisions are aligned with human values, it is imperative for us to understand not only what decisions they make but also how they come to those decisions. Reasoning language models, which provide both final responses and (partially transparent) intermediate thinking traces, present a timely opportunity to study AI procedural reasoning. Unlike math and code problems which often have objectively correct answers, moral dilemmas are an excellent testbed for process-focused evaluation because they allow for multiple defensible conclusions. To do so, we present MoReBench: 1,000 moral scenarios, each paired with a set of rubric criteria that experts consider essential to include (or avoid) when reasoning about the scenarios. MoReBench contains over 23 thousand criteria including identifying moral considerations, weighing trade-offs, and giving actionable recommendations to cover cases on AI advising humans moral decisions as well as making moral decisions autonomously. Separately, we curate MoReBench-Theory: 150 examples to test whether AI can reason under five major frameworks in normative ethics. Our results show that scaling laws and existing benchmarks on math, code, and scientific reasoning tasks fail to predict models' abilities to perform moral reasoning. Models also show partiality towards specific moral frameworks (e.g., Benthamite Act Utilitarianism and Kantian Deontology), which might be side effects of popular training paradigms. Together, these benchmarks advance process-focused reasoning evaluation towards safer and more transparent AI.
2025-10-18T07:34:31Z
46 pages, 8 figures, 10 tables. Published in ICLR 2026. Accepted at CHAI workshop and SPP 2026 (non-archival)
Yu Ying Chiu
Michael S. Lee
Rachel Calcott
Brandon Handoko
Paul de Font-Reaulx
Raphaël Millière
Paula Rodriguez
Chen Bo Calvin Zhang
Ziwen Han
Udari Madhushani Sehwag
Yash Maurya
Christina Q Knight
Harry R. Lloyd
Florence Bacus
Conor Downey
Mantas Mazeika
Bing Liu
Yejin Choi
Mitchell L Gordon
Sydney Levine
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16387v2
Probing the Hidden Talent of ASR Foundation Models for L2 English Oral Assessment
2026-01-26T08:58:34Z
In this paper, we explore the untapped potential of Whisper, a well-established automatic speech recognition (ASR) foundation model, in the context of L2 spoken language assessment (SLA). Unlike prior studies that extrinsically analyze transcriptions produced by Whisper, our approach goes a step further to probe its latent capabilities by extracting acoustic and linguistic features from hidden representations. With only a lightweight classifier being trained on top of Whisper's intermediate and final outputs, our method achieves strong performance on the GEPT picture-description dataset, outperforming existing cutting-edge baselines, including a multimodal approach. Furthermore, by incorporating image and text-prompt information as auxiliary relevance cues, we demonstrate additional performance gains. Finally, we conduct an in-depth analysis of Whisper's embeddings, which reveals that, even without task-specific fine-tuning, the model intrinsically encodes both ordinal proficiency patterns and semantic aspects of speech, highlighting its potential as a powerful foundation for SLA and other spoken language understanding tasks.
2025-10-18T08:10:24Z
Accepted to ICASSP 2026
Fu-An Chao
Bi-Cheng Yan
Berlin Chen
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16439v6
FrugalPrompt: Reducing Contextual Overhead in Large Language Models via Token Attribution
2026-09-19T06:23:37Z
Human communication heavily relies on laconism and inferential pragmatics, allowing listeners to successfully reconstruct rich meaning from sparse, telegraphic speech. In contrast, large language models (LLMs) owe much of their stellar performance to expansive input contexts, yet such verbosity inflates monetary costs, carbon footprint, and inference-time latency. This overhead manifests from the redundant low-utility tokens present in typical prompts, as only a fraction of tokens typically carries the majority of the semantic weight. Inspired by the aforementioned cognitive psycholinguistic processes, we address this inefficiency by introducing FrugalPrompt, a novel prompt compression framework for LLMs, which retains only the most semantically significant tokens. Leveraging two state-of-the-art token attribution methods, GlobEnc and DecompX, we assign salience scores to every token in an input sequence, rank them to retain the top-k% tokens, and obtain a sparse frugalized prompt. We establish the theoretical stability of our approach and provide strong empirical results across a suite of four NLP tasks to study the trade-off between the portion of retained tokens and performance. Experimental findings across retention settings reveal asymmetric performance patterns that suggest potential task contamination effects. We posit that our work contributes to a more nuanced understanding of LLM behavior in performance-efficiency trade-offs and delineates the boundary between tasks tolerant of contextual sparsity and those requiring exhaustive context.
2025-10-18T10:22:13Z
Accepted in Proceedings of the 3rd LUHME Workshop at EMNLP 2026, 16 pages, 3 figures, 4 tables
Syed Rifat Raiyan
Md Farhan Ishmam
Abdullah Al Imran
Mohammad Ali Moni
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16448v1
Input Domain Aware MoE: Decoupling Routing Decisions from Task Optimization in Mixture of Experts
2025-10-18T11:01:03Z
Sparse Mixture of Experts (sMoE) has become a pivotal approach for scaling large vision-language models, offering substantial capacity while maintaining computational efficiency through dynamic, sparse activation of experts. However, existing routing mechanisms, typically based on similarity scoring, struggle to effectively capture the underlying input structure. This limitation leads to a trade-off between expert specialization and balanced computation, hindering both scalability and performance. We propose Input Domain Aware MoE, a novel routing framework that leverages a probabilistic mixture model to better partition the input space. By modeling routing probabilities as a mixture of distributions, our method enables experts to develop clear specialization boundaries while achieving balanced utilization. Unlike conventional approaches, our routing mechanism is trained independently of task-specific objectives, allowing for stable optimization and decisive expert assignments. Empirical results on vision-language tasks demonstrate that our method consistently outperforms existing sMoE approaches, achieving higher task performance and improved expert utilization balance.
2025-10-18T11:01:03Z
ACM MM25
Yongxiang Hua
Haoyu Cao
Zhou Tao
Bocheng Li
Zihao Wu
Chaohu Liu
Linli Xu
10.1145/3746027.3755754
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16497v1
Edge-Based Speech Transcription and Synthesis for Kinyarwanda and Swahili Languages
2025-10-18T13:33:14Z
This paper presents a novel framework for speech transcription and synthesis, leveraging edge-cloud parallelism to enhance processing speed and accessibility for Kinyarwanda and Swahili speakers. It addresses the scarcity of powerful language processing tools for these widely spoken languages in East African countries with limited technological infrastructure. The framework utilizes the Whisper and SpeechT5 pre-trained models to enable speech-to-text (STT) and text-to-speech (TTS) translation. The architecture uses a cascading mechanism that distributes the model inference workload between the edge device and the cloud, thereby reducing latency and resource usage, benefiting both ends. On the edge device, our approach achieves a memory usage compression of 9.5% for the SpeechT5 model and 14% for the Whisper model, with a maximum memory usage of 149 MB. Experimental results indicate that on a 1.7 GHz CPU edge device with a 1 MB/s network bandwidth, the system can process a 270-character text in less than a minute for both speech-to-text and text-to-speech transcription. Using real-world survey data from Kenya, it is shown that the cascaded edge-cloud architecture proposed could easily serve as an excellent platform for STT and TTS transcription with good accuracy and response time.
2025-10-18T13:33:14Z
Pacome Simon Mbonimpa
Diane Tuyizere
Azizuddin Ahmed Biyabani
Ozan K. Tonguz
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16536v1
Few-Label Multimodal Modeling of SNP Variants and ECG Phenotypes Using Large Language Models for Cardiovascular Risk Stratification
2025-10-18T15:19:35Z
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) risk stratification remains a major challenge due to its multifactorial nature and limited availability of high-quality labeled datasets. While genomic and electrophysiological data such as SNP variants and ECG phenotypes are increasingly accessible, effectively integrating these modalities in low-label settings is non-trivial. This challenge arises from the scarcity of well-annotated multimodal datasets and the high dimensionality of biological signals, which limit the effectiveness of conventional supervised models. To address this, we present a few-label multimodal framework that leverages large language models (LLMs) to combine genetic and electrophysiological information for cardiovascular risk stratification. Our approach incorporates a pseudo-label refinement strategy to adaptively distill high-confidence labels from weakly supervised predictions, enabling robust model fine-tuning with only a small set of ground-truth annotations. To enhance the interpretability, we frame the task as a Chain of Thought (CoT) reasoning problem, prompting the model to produce clinically relevant rationales alongside predictions. Experimental results demonstrate that the integration of multimodal inputs, few-label supervision, and CoT reasoning improves robustness and generalizability across diverse patient profiles. Experimental results using multimodal SNP variants and ECG-derived features demonstrated comparable performance to models trained on the full dataset, underscoring the promise of LLM-based few-label multimodal modeling for advancing personalized cardiovascular care.
2025-10-18T15:19:35Z
Niranjana Arun Menon
Yulong Li
Iqra Farooq
Sara Ahmed
Muhammad Awais
Imran Razzak
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16548v1
NeurIPT: Foundation Model for Neural Interfaces
2025-10-18T15:45:00Z
Electroencephalography (EEG) has wide-ranging applications, from clinical diagnosis to brain-computer interfaces (BCIs). With the increasing volume and variety of EEG data, there has been growing interest in establishing foundation models (FMs) to scale up and generalize neural decoding. Despite showing early potential, applying FMs to EEG remains challenging due to substantial inter-subject, inter-task, and inter-condition variability, as well as diverse electrode configurations across recording setups. To tackle these open challenges, we propose NeurIPT, a foundation model developed for diverse EEG-based Neural Interfaces with a Pre-trained Transformer by capturing both homogeneous and heterogeneous spatio-temporal characteristics inherent in EEG signals. Temporally, we introduce Amplitude-Aware Masked Pretraining (AAMP), masking based on signal amplitude rather than random intervals, to learn robust representations across varying signal intensities beyond local interpolation. Moreover, this temporal representation is enhanced by a Progressive Mixture-of-Experts (PMoE) architecture, where specialized expert subnetworks are progressively introduced at deeper layers, adapting effectively to the diverse temporal characteristics of EEG signals. Spatially, NeurIPT leverages the 3D physical coordinates of electrodes, enabling effective transfer of embedding across varying EEG settings, and develops Intra-Inter Lobe Pooling (IILP) during fine-tuning to efficiently exploit regional brain features. Empirical evaluations across eight downstream BCI datasets, via fine-tuning, demonstrated NeurIPT consistently achieved state-of-the-art performance, highlighting its broad applicability and robust generalization. Our work pushes forward the state of FMs in EEG and offers insights into scalable and generalizable neural information processing systems.
2025-10-18T15:45:00Z
Accepted by The Thirty-Ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025). Project Page: https://ZzzitaoFang.github.io/projects/NeurIPT/
Zitao Fang
Chenxuan Li
Hongting Zhou
Shuyang Yu
Guodong Du
Ashwaq Qasem
Yang Lu
Jing Li
Junsong Zhang
Sim Kuan Goh
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16552v1
LANPO: Bootstrapping Language and Numerical Feedback for Reinforcement Learning in LLMs
2025-10-18T15:51:19Z
Reinforcement learning in large language models (LLMs) often relies on scalar rewards, a practice that discards valuable textual rationale buried in the rollouts, forcing the model to explore \textit{de novo} with each attempt and hindering sample efficiency. While LLMs can uniquely learn from language feedback provided in-context, naively integrating on-line experiences into RL training presents a paradox: feedback from the same problem risks information leakage and memorization, while feedback from different problems often leads to behavior collapse due to irrelevant context. To resolve this tension, we propose \textbf{Language-And-Numerical Policy Optimization (LANPO)}, a framework that cleanly separates the roles of feedback: language guides exploration, while numerical rewards drive optimization. LANPO builds a dynamic experience pool from past trials and introduces two principles to ensure feedback is effective: \emph{Reward-Agnostic Reflection} for safe intra-sample self-correction and \emph{Relevant Abstraction} to distill generalizable lessons from inter-sample experiences. Across mathematical reasoning benchmarks, LANPO enables 7B and 14B models to significantly outperform strong baselines trained with GRPO in test accuracy. Our work provides a robust method for integrating historical experiences into the LLM RL loop, creating more effective and data-efficient learning agents.
2025-10-18T15:51:19Z
Ang Li
Yifei Wang
Zhihang Yuan
Stefanie Jegelka
Yisen Wang
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16565v2
Language over Content: Tracing Cultural Understanding in Multilingual Large Language Models
2025-11-11T04:32:20Z
Large language models (LLMs) are increasingly used across diverse cultural contexts, making accurate cultural understanding essential. Prior evaluations have mostly focused on output-level performance, obscuring the factors that drive differences in responses, while studies using circuit analysis have covered few languages and rarely focused on culture. In this work, we trace LLMs' internal cultural understanding mechanisms by measuring activation path overlaps when answering semantically equivalent questions under two conditions: varying the target country while fixing the question language, and varying the question language while fixing the country. We also use same-language country pairs to disentangle language from cultural aspects. Results show that internal paths overlap more for same-language, cross-country questions than for cross-language, same-country questions, indicating strong language-specific patterns. Notably, the South Korea-North Korea pair exhibits low overlap and high variability, showing that linguistic similarity does not guarantee aligned internal representation.
2025-10-18T16:19:45Z
Accepted to CIKM 2025 Workshop on Human Centric AI
Seungho Cho
Changgeon Ko
Eui Jun Hwang
Junmyeong Lee
Huije Lee
Jong C. Park
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16567v1
Hallucination Benchmark for Speech Foundation Models
2025-10-18T16:26:16Z
Hallucinations in automatic speech recognition (ASR) systems refer to fluent and coherent transcriptions produced by neural ASR models that are completely unrelated to the underlying acoustic input (i.e., the speech signal). While similar to conventional decoding errors in potentially compromising the usability of transcriptions for downstream applications, hallucinations can be more detrimental due to their preservation of syntactically and semantically plausible structure. This apparent coherence can mislead subsequent processing stages and introduce serious risks, particularly in critical domains such as healthcare and law. Conventional evaluation metrics are primarily centered on error-based metrics and fail to distinguish between phonetic inaccuracies and hallucinations. Consequently, there is a critical need for new evaluation frameworks that can effectively identify and assess models with a heightened propensity for generating hallucinated content. To this end, we introduce SHALLOW, the first benchmark framework that systematically categorizes and quantifies hallucination phenomena in ASR along four complementary axes: lexical, phonetic, morphological, and semantic. We define targeted metrics within each category to produce interpretable profiles of model behavior. Through evaluation across various architectures and speech domains, we have found that SHALLOW metrics correlate strongly with word error rate (WER) when recognition quality is high (i.e., low WER). Still, this correlation weakens substantially as WER increases. SHALLOW, therefore, captures fine-grained error patterns that WER fails to distinguish under degraded and challenging conditions. Our framework supports specific diagnosis of model weaknesses and provides feedback for model improvement beyond what aggregate error rates can offer.
2025-10-18T16:26:16Z
Under Review
Alkis Koudounas
Moreno La Quatra
Manuel Giollo
Sabato Marco Siniscalchi
Elena Baralis
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16573v1
AI-Generated Text Detection in Low-Resource Languages: A Case Study on Urdu
2025-10-18T16:45:25Z
Large Language Models (LLMs) are now capable of generating text that closely resembles human writing, making them powerful tools for content creation, but this growing ability has also made it harder to tell whether a piece of text was written by a human or by a machine. This challenge becomes even more serious for languages like Urdu, where there are very few tools available to detect AI-generated text. To address this gap, we propose a novel AI-generated text detection framework tailored for the Urdu language. A balanced dataset comprising 1,800 humans authored, and 1,800 AI generated texts, sourced from models such as Gemini, GPT-4o-mini, and Kimi AI was developed. Detailed linguistic and statistical analysis was conducted, focusing on features such as character and word counts, vocabulary richness (Type Token Ratio), and N-gram patterns, with significance evaluated through t-tests and MannWhitney U tests. Three state-of-the-art multilingual transformer models such as mdeberta-v3-base, distilbert-base-multilingualcased, and xlm-roberta-base were fine-tuned on this dataset. The mDeBERTa-v3-base achieved the highest performance, with an F1-score 91.29 and accuracy of 91.26% on the test set. This research advances efforts in contesting misinformation and academic misconduct in Urdu-speaking communities and contributes to the broader development of NLP tools for low resource languages.
2025-10-18T16:45:25Z
Muhammad Ammar
Hadiya Murad Hadi
Usman Majeed Butt
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16591v1
Symmetry and Generalisation in Neural Approximations of Renormalisation Transformations
2025-10-18T17:29:23Z
Deep learning models have proven enormously successful at using multiple layers of representation to learn relevant features of structured data. Encoding physical symmetries into these models can improve performance on difficult tasks, and recent work has motivated the principle of parameter symmetry breaking and restoration as a unifying mechanism underlying their hierarchical learning dynamics. We evaluate the role of parameter symmetry and network expressivity in the generalisation behaviour of neural networks when learning a real-space renormalisation group (RG) transformation, using the central limit theorem (CLT) as a test case map. We consider simple multilayer perceptrons (MLPs) and graph neural networks (GNNs), and vary weight symmetries and activation functions across architectures. Our results reveal a competition between symmetry constraints and expressivity, with overly complex or overconstrained models generalising poorly. We analytically demonstrate this poor generalisation behaviour for certain constrained MLP architectures by recasting the CLT as a cumulant recursion relation and making use of an established framework to propagate cumulants through MLPs. We also empirically validate an extension of this framework from MLPs to GNNs, elucidating the internal information processing performed by these more complex models. These findings offer new insight into the learning dynamics of symmetric networks and their limitations in modelling structured physical transformations.
2025-10-18T17:29:23Z
Cassidy Ashworth
Pietro Liò
Francesco Caso
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16604v1
Fine-tuning of Large Language Models for Constituency Parsing Using a Sequence to Sequence Approach
2025-10-18T18:00:20Z
Recent advances in natural language processing with large neural models have opened new possibilities for syntactic analysis based on machine learning. This work explores a novel approach to phrase-structure analysis by fine-tuning large language models (LLMs) to translate an input sentence into its corresponding syntactic structure. The main objective is to extend the capabilities of MiSintaxis, a tool designed for teaching Spanish syntax. Several models from the Hugging Face repository were fine-tuned using training data generated from the AnCora-ES corpus, and their performance was evaluated using the F1 score. The results demonstrate high accuracy in phrase-structure analysis and highlight the potential of this methodology.
2025-10-18T18:00:20Z
6 pages, 3 figures. Submitted to SEPLN 2023 Conference
Francisco Jose Cortes Delgado
Eduardo Martinez Gracia
Rafael Valencia Garcia
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.17892v1
Advances in Pre-trained Language Models for Domain-Specific Text Classification: A Systematic Review
2025-10-18T22:46:53Z
The exponential increase in scientific literature and online information necessitates efficient methods for extracting knowledge from textual data. Natural language processing (NLP) plays a crucial role in addressing this challenge, particularly in text classification tasks. While large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success in NLP, their accuracy can suffer in domain-specific contexts due to specialized vocabulary, unique grammatical structures, and imbalanced data distributions. In this systematic literature review (SLR), we investigate the utilization of pre-trained language models (PLMs) for domain-specific text classification. We systematically review 41 articles published between 2018 and January 2024, adhering to the PRISMA statement (preferred reporting items for systematic reviews and meta-analyses). This review methodology involved rigorous inclusion criteria and a multi-step selection process employing AI-powered tools. We delve into the evolution of text classification techniques and differentiate between traditional and modern approaches. We emphasize transformer-based models and explore the challenges and considerations associated with using LLMs for domain-specific text classification. Furthermore, we categorize existing research based on various PLMs and propose a taxonomy of techniques used in the field. To validate our findings, we conducted a comparative experiment involving BERT, SciBERT, and BioBERT in biomedical sentence classification. Finally, we present a comparative study on the performance of LLMs in text classification tasks across different domains. In addition, we examine recent advancements in PLMs for domain-specific text classification and offer insights into future directions and limitations in this rapidly evolving domain.
2025-10-18T22:46:53Z
41 pages, 10 figures, 13 tables
Zhyar Rzgar K. Rostam and Gábor Kertész. 2025. Advances in Pre-trained Language Models for Domain-Specific Text Classification: A Systematic Review. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. 16, 6, Article 124 (December 2025), 41 pages
Zhyar Rzgar K. Rostam
Gábor Kertész
10.1145/3763002
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16660v1
Universal and Transferable Attacks on Pathology Foundation Models
2025-10-18T23:03:45Z
We introduce Universal and Transferable Adversarial Perturbations (UTAP) for pathology foundation models that reveal critical vulnerabilities in their capabilities. Optimized using deep learning, UTAP comprises a fixed and weak noise pattern that, when added to a pathology image, systematically disrupts the feature representation capabilities of multiple pathology foundation models. Therefore, UTAP induces performance drops in downstream tasks that utilize foundation models, including misclassification across a wide range of unseen data distributions. In addition to compromising the model performance, we demonstrate two key features of UTAP: (1) universality: its perturbation can be applied across diverse field-of-views independent of the dataset that UTAP was developed on, and (2) transferability: its perturbation can successfully degrade the performance of various external, black-box pathology foundation models - never seen before. These two features indicate that UTAP is not a dedicated attack associated with a specific foundation model or image dataset, but rather constitutes a broad threat to various emerging pathology foundation models and their applications. We systematically evaluated UTAP across various state-of-the-art pathology foundation models on multiple datasets, causing a significant drop in their performance with visually imperceptible modifications to the input images using a fixed noise pattern. The development of these potent attacks establishes a critical, high-standard benchmark for model robustness evaluation, highlighting a need for advancing defense mechanisms and potentially providing the necessary assets for adversarial training to ensure the safe and reliable deployment of AI in pathology.
2025-10-18T23:03:45Z
38 Pages, 8 Figures
Light: Science & Applications (2026)
Yuntian Wang
Xilin Yang
Che-Yung Shen
Nir Pillar
Aydogan Ozcan
10.1038/s41377-026-02347-w
http://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16677v1
Renaissance of RNNs in Streaming Clinical Time Series: Compact Recurrence Remains Competitive with Transformers
2025-10-19T00:45:47Z
We present a compact, strictly causal benchmark for streaming clinical time series on the MIT--BIH Arrhythmia Database using per-second heart rate. Two tasks are studied under record-level, non-overlapping splits: near-term tachycardia risk (next ten seconds) and one-step heart rate forecasting. We compare a GRU-D (RNN) and a Transformer under matched training budgets against strong non-learned baselines. Evaluation is calibration-aware for classification and proper for forecasting, with temperature scaling and grouped bootstrap confidence intervals. On MIT-BIH, GRU-D slightly surpasses the Transformer for tachycardia risk, while the Transformer clearly lowers forecasting error relative to GRU-D and persistence. Our results show that, in longitudinal monitoring, model choice is task-dependent: compact RNNs remain competitive for short-horizon risk scoring, whereas compact Transformers deliver clearer gains for point forecasting.
2025-10-19T00:45:47Z
Ran Tong
Jiaqi Liu
Su Liu
Xin Hu
Lanruo Wang