
PAGE 1
 
1 
 
Universal and Transferable Attacks on Pathology Foundation 
Models 
Yuntian Wang1,2,3†
, Xilin Y ang1,2,3†
, Che-Yung Shen1,2,3, Nir Pillar4 and Aydogan Ozcan1,2,3,5* 
1Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA 
2Bioengineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA  
3California NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA 
4Department of Pathology, Hadassah Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, 91120, Israel 
5Department of Surgery, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, 90095, USA  
†
These authors contributed equally to the work 
*Correspondence to: ozcan@ucla.edu 
 
Abstract 
The advent of foundation models has initiated a paradigm shift in digital pathology with a plethora of 
emerging opportunities. However, these powerful systems also introduce centralized vulnerabilities, making 
them critically susceptible to sophisticated adversarial attacks that might pose a significant threat to patient 
safety. To shed light on these potential threats , here we introduce Universal and Transferable Adversarial 
Perturbations (UTAP) for pathology foundation models that reveal critical vulnerabilities in their capabilities. 
Optimized using deep learning, UTAP comprise s a fixed and weak noise pattern that, when added to a 
pathology image, systematically disrupts the feature representation capabilities of multiple pathology 
foundation models.  Therefore, UTAP induces performance drops in downstream tasks that utilize foundation 
models, including misclassification across a wide range of unseen data distributions . In addition to 
compromising the model performance, we demonstrate two key features of UTAP: (1) universality: its 

PAGE 2
 
2 
 
perturbation can be applied across diverse field-of-views (FOV) independent of the dataset that UTAP was 
developed on, and (2) transferability: its perturbation can successfully degrade the performance of various 
external, black-box pathology foundation models – never seen before. These two features indicate that UTAP 
is not a dedicated attack associated with a specific foundation model or image dataset, but rather constitutes 
a broad threat to various emerging pathology foundation models and their applications. We systematically 
evaluated UTAP across various state-of-the-art pathology foundation models on multiple datasets, causing a 
significant drop in their performance with visually imperceptible modifications to the input images using a 
fixed noise pattern. The development of these potent attacks establishes a critical, high-standard benchmark 
for model robustness evaluation, highlighting a need for advanc ing defense mechanisms and potentially 
providing the necessary assets for adversarial training to ensure the safe and reliable deployment of AI in 
pathology. 
 
Introduction 
The integration of Artificial Intelligence (AI) into computational pathology, utilizing general -purpose 
foundation models, has significantly enhanced performance on a vast range of tasks, including cancer 
detection, subtyping, grading, and staging1–6, compared to task-expert AI models that specialize in only one 
task. Such foundation models are predominantly self-supervised by either contrastive learning or masked 
modeling7–11 and effectively utilize Vision Transformers (ViT)12 as their backbone. These foundation models 
are pre-trained at large scale using e.g., millions of pathology slides, and then used as feature extractors for 
diverse downstream tasks13–17. The self-attention mechanism—central to ViTs —enables long-range context, 
but its global token coupling can also be exploited for attacks : attention-aware or patch-based adversarial 
methods have shown effective targeted perturbations against ViTs 18–25. These adversarial attacks, utilizing 

PAGE 3
 
3 
 
subtle and carefully crafted perturbations, are often imperceptible to human observers but can induce 
catastrophic model failures 25–27, ranging from representation power collapse to attacker -directed 
hallucinations. Such an attack could, for instance, cause a model to misdiagnose a malignant tumor as benign, 
posing a direct and severe risk to patients, especially without human experts in the loop. 
 
In the domain of adversarial attacks, earlier efforts predominantly focused on a single or a small set of 
specific image samples or models, resulting in attacks that are highly specialized in scope18,21. In this work, 
we move beyond model - or image patch-specific attacks to explore more broadly applicable threats to 
pathology foundation models  characterized by  both universality and transferability. For exploring the 
vulnerabilities of pathology -related foundation models, we developed  a universal and transferable 
adversarial perturbation (UTAP) framework, which utilizes an adaptive Projected Gradient Descent (PGD)-
based28 optimization process to iteratively craft a subtle noise pattern. We define universality as the capability 
of a single, fixed perturbation that applies across a wide range of models and data, including unseen images 
from different dataset s to cause model failure. We define transferability as an attack crafted against one 
foundation model, where it can successfully compromise, without any adjustments to its perturbation, other 
foundation models, which are never seen before, i.e., neither the parameters nor the gradients of the attacked 
models are accessible to the attacker. We improved the universality and transferability of our adversarial 
attacks with two key designs. First, we iteratively optimize the attack across a set of training data to disrupt 
the model’s output feature space by minimizing the similarity between the feature representations of the 
original and perturbed/attacked images. This strategy fundamentally hampers the model's representational 
power and grants the perturbations superior universality across various image patches . Second, we add 
random masking  and attention dropping  regularization when computing the gradient s to ensure better 

PAGE 4
 
4 
 
transferability to other foundation models never seen before, i.e., following a black-box setting. The efficacy 
of UTAP was comprehensively validated by demonstrating that a single, fixed perturbation successfully 
degrades the performance of seven state-of-the-art pathology models29–35, significantly reducing the probing 
accuracy in downstream classification tasks while simultaneously compromising the representation power 
of all the tested models. 
 
UTAP shows that one universal perturbation trained in one setting transfers to unseen datasets and other 
foundation models without any modifications, revealing system-level vulnerabilities that standard evaluation 
methods can miss. To support safe r development and  deployment of pathology foundation models, it is 
essential to comprehensively study these threats and develop robust defenses. Framed as “ethical hacking”, 
our work develops and benchmarks advanced attacks and aims to raise awareness, with the goal of enabling 
powerful tools needed to build, assess, and improve the next generation of resilient, secure computational 
pathology models. 
 
Results 
Universal and Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Pathology Foundation Models 
We first validate our attack strategy on a downstream classification task using a dataset of 100,000 non -
overlapping patches from hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stained histological images of human colorectal 
cancer (CRC) and normal tissue35. As illustrated in Fig. 1 and in the Methods section, the attack generation 
scheme involves iteratively optimizing a single, trainable UTAP pattern via the adaptive PGD28 method with 
random masking and attention dropping regularization36. For details of the implementation refer to  the 
Methods section. During the training, the UTAP-generated noise pattern is added to original images, and 

PAGE 5
 
5 
 
both the original and the attacked images are passed through a frozen pathology foundation model to extract 
their respective feature representations. The core of our optimization aim is to minimize the cosine similarity 
between the original and attacked feature embeddings, thereby forcing them to be as dissimilar as possible 
in the feature space , corrupting the representation power of the foundation model . Once the  training 
converged and the perturbation is finalized, the UTAP’s effectiveness was comprehensively evaluated using 
a methodology to assess universality and transferability concurrently. To assess the performance of 
classification downstream tasks, we first trained a light-weight linear classifier on the extracted features from 
clean images (classification tokens / CLS tokens) in the classification training dataset and then computed the 
blind testing classification accuracy on the corresponding test dataset; this sets the baseline accuracy in each 
task before the attack (see Methods for details). We then applied a single, fixed UTAP perturbation pattern 
to the images in the same testing dataset that neither the classifier nor UTAP saw during their optimization. 
These perturbed/attacked images were then evaluated agai nst multiple foundation models, including the 
original model used during UTAP optimization (internal generalization) and new, unseen foundation models 
(external generalization). The attack's success was quantified by the drop in the classification accuracy in 
each case—computed as the difference between the original and attacked accuracy values—using the well 
optimized pre-trained linear classifier for each foundation model and data combination. This testing pipeline 
allows us to confirm the attack's universality by quantifying its impact  on new, unseen  data, and its 
transferability by assessing the performance degradation across different foundation models – never seen 
before. 
 
The efficacy of the UTAP attack was qualitatively and quantitatively evaluated in Fig. 2. The perturbation 
pattern itself, visualized against a neutral gray background in Fig. 2a, is composed of pixel values strictly 

PAGE 6
 
6 
 
bounded within a small range of [−𝜖, 𝜖] . As a direct consequence of this constraint, when the UTAP  
perturbation is added to the original images, the resulting attacked images are visually almost 
indistinguishable from their unperturbed counterparts. This perceptual subtlety is also demonstrated in Fig. 
2a with a side -by-side comparison of the original and attacked tissue patches from three distinct classes: 
adipose (ADI), lymphocyte (LYM), and normal colon mucosa (NORM).  Further analysis of UTAP's 
statistical properties is reported in Fig. 2b, which displays a histogram of its pixel-wise values averaged from 
the three-color channels. The histogram plot reveals a distribution  centered approximately at zero  and 
exhibits prominent spikes at the ±𝜖 bounds, a characteristic outcome of the hard energy constraints enforced 
by the adaptive PGD optimization algorithm used to generate the attack (see the Methods section).  
 
While UTAP is designed to be visually imperceptible, its impact on model performance is substantial. The 
impact of the attack  on classification accuracy was quantitatively reported in Fig. 2 c, which details the 
attack's performance across seven different foundation models  while we only us ed one foundation model 
(UNI2-h) for training UTAP. The chart compares the original classification accuracy of each model (green 
bars) with the accuracy on the images attacked by UTAP (blue bars). The substantial drop in performance, 
quantified for each model (red bars), demonstrates the attack's ability to induce  significant model failure. 
Critically, this degradation is observed not only in the model used to train the perturbation (UNI2 -h in this 
case) but across all the other six external, black-box foundation models (the weights and gradients of which 
were not known), confirming the attack's high degree of transferability.  It is important to note that this 
accuracy drop is not caused by an attack on the downstream linear prob ing layer, but rather stems directly 
from the corruption of the upstream feature representations, which is also confirmed with the analysis in Fig. 
2d-e. To shed more light on  our attack’s impact on the feature space  representation, Fig. 2d displays the 

PAGE 7
 
7 
 
Uniform Manifold Approximation  Projections (UMAP)37 of the feature embedding of image patches 
extracted by the foundation model before and after the attack. The left and middle scatter plots show that in 
the absence of an attack, the training and testing feature embeddings of different tissue classes form distinct, 
well-separated clusters through UMAP. In contrast, the right scatter plot reveals that after applying the 
optimized UTAP perturbation to the test images , these orderly clusters collapse into chaotic and largely 
undifferentiated structures. This dimensionality reduction confirms that the UTAP operates by fundamentally 
corrupting the foundation model's feature representation capability, causing the feature space to collapse, 
destroying the linear separability of features, and thereby crippling its discriminative classification 
performance. Figure 2e further illustrates this effect through the Principal Component Analysis (PCA) of 
the feature representations in addition to UMAP. These visualization results confirm a similar insight that 
the attacked features undergo a mode collapse, forming a tight, squeezed cluster in contrast to the well -
separated original features. These analyses demonstrated that UTAP was able to not only cause significant 
classification accuracy drops, but also comprise the general representation power of the foundation models, 
even for black-box foundation models that were never seen before. 
 
To further understand the effect of the UTAP attack and its behavior, we compared the probabilities predicted 
by the linear classifier from the original image data versus the probabilities resulting from the attacked 
images. Supplementary Fig. S 1a presents the results of the  attack on  UNI2-h model  alongside the 
corresponding original and attacked images shown on the left for all nine data classes. The results highlight 
a key difference between UTAP and traditional adversarial attack methods. Conventional attacks are 
typically targeted, i.e., they have a predefined attack goal, manipulating inputs to maximize the probability 
for a specific incorrect class 28,38. In contrast, as shown in  Supplementary Fig. S1 b, UTAP focuses on 

PAGE 8
 
8 
 
degrading the feature space itself, without a fixed directional preference, and therefore it does not manifest 
itself as a consistent peak for any single incorrect class, but rather generally corrupts the model’s confidence, 
resulting in a more uniform distribution across all false classes. This non -targeted behavior is further 
demonstrated in Supplementary Fig. S2, which compares the classification probability distributions for the 
internal foundation model (UNI2-h) against several external foundation models (e.g., Gigapath and 
Virchow2) which were not used during the training phase. The figure reveals that while the attack degrades 
performance across all the foundation models, the specific characteristics of the resulting probability 
distributions are model -dependent. These variations on the predicted probability distributions  underscore 
that UTAP does not force a single, predictable outcome. Instead, it interacts with each foundation model with 
a unique behavior , providing further evidence that it operates by fundamentally disrupting the feature 
representation capabilities with high transferability to black-box foundation models, never seen before. 
 
We further investigated UTAP attack's impact on the model's spatial features by visualizing the cosine 
similarity between the classification/[CLS] tokens and all the local visual tokens (see the Methods) and 
plotting them as a heatmap in the corresponding locations on the whole slide image. As illustrated in Fig. 3, 
before the attack, the resulting heatmaps clearly show the  foundation model's focus on diagnostically 
relevant tissue structures, indicated by high similarity (red hues), while assigning low similarity  values to 
irrelevant regions (blue hues). Following the application of UTAP perturbation, the attacked attention maps 
become profoundly disrupted, exhibiting a scattered and incoherent distribution of cosine similarity values. 
This degradation provides  direct evidence that our attack does not merely manipul ate a global decision 
boundary but fundamentally impairs the model's core ability to extract meaningful and localized features 
across the entire image, thereby compromising its foundational understanding and representation of the  

PAGE 9
 
9 
 
tissue content. 
 
To better understand the impact of the regularization method used in UTAP training, we also conducted an 
ablation study evaluating the efficacy of UTAP trained with and without attention dropping and random 
masking. The results  reported in Supplementary Fig. S3  reveal a n intuitive trade-off: removing the 
regularization techniques boosts the attack's efficacy against the training foundation model (resulting in 
improved internal attacks) but significantly compromises its transferability to external models (resulting in 
worse external attacks) . This is because unregularized perturbation s overfit to the training model by 
exploiting model-specific attention patterns. As these patterns are not strictly conserved across different 
foundation models, the perturbation fails to generalize, diminishing its effectiveness in black-box attacks to 
other foundation models, never seen before. 
 
To further assess the universality of UTAP across different datasets, we evaluated the attack’s impact on an 
entirely unseen, out-of-distribution dataset. We assembled an external test set by selecting six classes from 
The Cancer Genome Atlas Program (TCGA) Uniform Tumor dataset39, none of which were used during the 
optimization process. Applied without any adaptation, the pre-optimized UTAP pattern produced ~20% drop 
in the classification accuracy across all the evaluated models (see Supplementary Fig. S4). This successful 
attack on out -of-distribution (OOD) images  further demonstrate the  universality of  UTAP perturbation 
method, indicating that UTAP exploits dataset-agnostic, feature-level vulnerabilities, underscoring a broader 
security risk beyond the source distribution/dataset. 
 
To further quantify transferability  of UTAP, we conduct ed a systematic  cross-model attack analysis, 

PAGE 10
 
10 
 
summarized in Fig. 4. UTAP optimization in this analysis  used the same  intensity constraint and step 
schedule, and evaluation is performed on unseen patches for every model; see the Methods for details. This 
evaluation is structured as a matrix-like representation where the row indexes represent the foundation model 
used to train the UTAP perturbation that is used, while the column indexes represent the foundation model 
being attacked and evaluated. The diagonal entries, highlighted by the dashed green boxes, correspond to 
internal attacks, where the perturbation is evaluated  on the same foundation model architecture it was 
developed on. The off-diagonal elements represent external attacks, simulating a black-box scenario where 
a perturbation trained on one foundation model is directly used to attack other unseen foundation models. 
Crucially, all attacks presented in this analysis were performed on new, unseen image patches.  The results 
of this analysis reveal  two critical findings. First, the internal attacks show that the UTAP perturbation 
process is consistently powerful, reducing accuracy on the models on which it was trained. More importantly, 
the external attack results reveal that UTAP exhibits a high degree of transferability across all training-testing 
model pairs. For instance, a UTAP perturbation trained on UNI2-h not only reduces its own accuracy down 
to 12.27% but also successfully degrades the performance of other foundation models, such as lowering 
Prov-Gigapath's accuracy from 96.42 to 48.69% and Virchow2's accuracy from 97.23% to 25.52%. 
 
We further evaluated the transferability of UTAP by training it with multi-source optimization, in which the 
source model is randomly switched every eight steps from a  fix-sized pool drawn from seven foundation 
models (detailed in Supplementary Fig. S5). All UTAP optimization steps used the same intensity constraint 
and step schedule, and evaluation is performed on unseen image patches for every model.  In each 
optimization process, the foundation models included in the pool are treated as internal (dashed green box), 
while the excluded models are treated as external (orange box). The results reveal two key trends. First, the 

PAGE 11
 
11 
 
foundation models present in the training pool experience markedly larger accuracy drops than external 
models, indicating that direct exposure  to the foundation model during UTAP training  still confers a n 
advantage to the attack. Second, as the pool size increases, transfer to external foundation models becomes 
broader and more uniform in their attack performance, but the per-model impact on internal targets relatively 
diminishes. Intuitively, optimizing the attack against a diverse group of foundation models  steers the 
perturbation toward features shared across these models (which improves transfer success), while conflicting 
gradients prevent over-specialization to any single model weight or architecture (reducing peak severity). 
Practically, this suggests that an attacker can tune the size of the model pool to balance maximal depth on a 
specific model versus wid e, cross-model disruption. With these analyses, we demonstrated the ability of 
UTAP to significantly degrade the performance s of multiple, unseen external foundation models; these 
results underscore a critical vulnerability, highlighting a need for advanced defense mechanisms that are 
robust against not only direct attacks but also these more insidious, transferable threats. 
 
Having established how training diversity modulates transfer ability, next we examine how optimization 
choices shape UTAP’s performance by exploring two key hyperparameters: 𝜃 which is the scaling factor for 
the step size and 𝜖 which is the allowable magnitude of the perturbation; see Fig. 5. We first analyzed the 
impact of 𝜃, by training all UTAP perturbations on the UNI2-h model and evaluating them across all seven 
foundation models while varying 𝜃 (𝜖 fixed). The histogram of the UTAP  perturbations and the attacked 
images for different choices of 𝜃 are visualized in Fig. 5a. In these results, we observe that larger 𝜃 drives 
the perturbation distribution to become more bimodal, concentrating at the ±𝜖 boundaries. The quantitative 
accuracy evaluations reported in Fig. 5b reveal a distinct difference between the internal and external attack 
performances. The internal attack efficacy on UNI2-h increases monotonically with 𝜃, whereas the external 

PAGE 12
 
12 
 
attack efficacy is non-monotonic: the highest accuracy drop is observed at an intermediate 𝜃 = 10 and then 
weakens. Thus, step size critically governs transferability, with an optimal 𝜃  value balancing internal 
strength and cross-model generalization of the attack . Similarly, with 𝜃 being fixed, we also analyzed the 
impact of 𝜖—the perturbation bound—which sets the maximum magnitude of the perturbation pattern. The 
analyses and visualizations reported in Fig. 5c reveal that as 𝜖 increases, the perturbation becomes stronger 
and as anticipated, the attack gets visually noticeable on the resulting images. This increase in perturbation 
strength correlates directly with attack efficacy , as shown in Fig. 5d: accuracy drops due the attack grow 
monotonically with increasing 𝜖 across all the targeted models. Consequently, 𝜖 governs the potency–stealth 
trade-off: larger bounds yield stronger but more perceptible attacks. 
 
Patch-Specific and Class-Specific Adversarial Perturbations  
Next we consider image patch-specific and data class-specific adversarial perturbations. Consider a scenario 
in which an adversary targets a specific patient whose tissue specimen is submitted for diagnostic analysis. 
Depending on the adversary’s prior knowledge of the patient, the required universality of the attack varies 
along a hierarchy from the most to the least specific. At the most specific level  (low universality), if the 
attacker obtains an exact digital copy of the patient’s tissue patch, they can craft a bespoke perturbation; we 
term this attack as Patch-Specific Adversarial Perturbation (PSAP), which optimizes a unique perturbation 
pattern per image patch for an adversarial attack . With only class -level knowledge (e.g., the specimen’s 
diagnostic category), the attacker can also deploy a class-conditional perturbation; we model this scenario 
using the Class-Specific Adversarial Perturbation (CSAP) to cause misclassification of a specific data class. 
At the least specific/most universal strategy, an attacker possesses no prior knowledge of the specific image 
or its class  label, necessitating a universal attack  (UTAP) that can degrade model performance across all 

PAGE 13
 
13 
 
inputs and models – as we reported in our former sub-section. At the lowest level of universality, we evaluate 
image patch-specific adversarial perturbations (shown in Fig. 6), where an attacker has knowledge of a 
targeted, specific sample image. In this attack strategy, each image patch receives a trainable perturbation, 
which is added to the  corresponding patch before the attacked image is processed by the frozen pathology 
foundation model and its pre -trained linear classifier.  To induce misclassifications, the perturbation s are 
iteratively optimized by maximizing the cross-entropy loss between the model's prediction and the one-hot 
ground-truth label (detailed in Methods section). This attack strategy reveals a critical trade -off between 
internal attack performance and external generalization: tailored to individual image patches, PSAP collapses 
the classification accuracy on the optimized samples from 97.37% to 0.00% where none of the predictions 
are correct. However, the attack fails in terms of universality, leaving performance on unseen images largely 
intact (95.00 % classification accuracy). Thus, while patch-specific attacks can severely compromise a model 
on specific image data, their generalization capability is limited since the attack design is patch-specific. 
 
Next, we evaluated class-specific adversarial perturbations that target all images within a single tissue class 
(see Fig. 7). A single perturbation was trained per class—for example, one fixed perturbation pattern for all 
adipose (ADI) images and another one for all lymphocyte (LYM) images—and then added to each image in 
that data class. The perturbated/attacked images were then passed through the frozen pathology foundation 
model with its pre -trained linear classifier. Similar to the perturbation training method used in PSAP , the 
optimization of CSAP maximizes the cross-entropy between the model’s prediction and the one-hot ground-
truth label over the class dataset (see  the Methods). CSAP is highly effective within its desired scope, 
reducing the accuracy on its targeted class from 97.37% to 1.42% on training images and to 29.80% on 
unseen test images. Therefore, CSAP generalizes within its attacked data class, and yet remains specialized, 

PAGE 14
 
14 
 
showing little effect on other tissue types/classes due its design. 
 
Compared to PSAP and CSAP, UTAP presents, by its design, the highest level of universality —a single, 
image-agnostic perturbation pattern applicable to almost all unseen samples. As summarized in Fig. 8, UTAP 
shows the strongest and most consistent generalization, yielding comparable degradation  of classification 
accuracy on training  (14.10%) and unseen  test images (12.27%). Overall, as universality increases, 
overfitting diminishes and the attack’s impact on novel images strengthens, making UTAP a practical and 
consequential threat. 
 
Discussion 
We presented UTAP, a single, universal, perturbation that transfers across  different pathology foundation 
models. In contrast to logit -level attacks that maximize cross -entropy to induce class flips along model -
specific decision boundaries , UTAP intervenes earlier in the pipeline  by directly disrupting the feature 
representations. Our training scheme is designed to disrupt a model's core feature representations on 
classification/[CLS] tokens and also local patch features, yielding perturbations that are highly transferable 
and capable of compromising black-box foundation models on unseen images, without any model-specific 
or instance-specific post-training. 
 
A central advantage of UTAP is its strong cross-model transferability demonstrated across various foundation 
models. UTAP targets the representation itself, corrupting a more fundamental and widely shared structure. 
During UTAP training, we optimize the perturbation using a cosine -similarity loss—rather than the cross -
entropy objective used in PSAP and CSAP —to directly decorrelate the attacked feature vectors from the 

PAGE 15
 
15 
 
original representations. This objective drives the features to become maximally dissimilar, and compels the 
optimization to exploit the full spectrum of activations, including negative values, thereby reorienting the 
vectors in feature space. By manipulating the geometry of the representation manifold instead of merely 
disrupting logits across a decision boundary, UTAP induces a more fundamental corruption of 
representational power, which likely underpins its superior transferability across architectures and different 
black-box models. This effect is also evident in Fig. 2d–e: UMAP and PCA projections reveal a collapse of 
the feature manifold, preventing the formation of semantically meaningful clusters after the UTAP attacks. 
This strategy is particularly powerful against ViTs, which operate by dividing images into a grid of patches 
and learning local feature representations for each. By incorporating attention dropping and random masking 
regularization techniques during the training stage, the UTAP perturbation was forced  to focus its 
optimization on disrupting these local, patch -level features rather than the more complex inter -patch 
relationships learned by the attention mechanism36, which resulted in a greater classification accuracy drop 
of external models as reported in Supplementary Fig. S3. The resulting grid-like pattern that is often visible 
in UTAP arises from its interaction with the ViT’s patch-embedding stage, where the perturbation aligns with 
position token boundaries and interacts with the model’s patch-based representation. The fact that this single 
approach is effective across numerous, independently trained  foundation models suggests they have all 
converged on a similar scheme for representing fundamental histopathological features, making this shared 
representation a critical and exploitable vulnerability. 
 
To investigate the influence of the training set size on the attack's efficacy, we conducted an ablation study 
by varying the number of images ( 𝑁 ) used to optimize UTAP. As shown in Supplementary Fig. S 6, 
increasing the number of training images from 𝑁 = 900, 1800, 2700 to 𝑁 = 100𝑘 (full training dataset)  

PAGE 16
 
16 
 
yielded no significant improvement in the attack's performance across both internal and external foundation 
models. Post-attack classification accuracies were largely consistent across settings with small variations. 
This suggests that a modest, diverse image data set suffices to capture generalizable vulnerabilities  of 
pathology foundation models in representation space. To conserve computation, we therefore used 𝑁 = 900 
in our results unless otherwise noted; the training time for a  single UTAP pattern on 900 training samples 
took ~13 min. 
 
To further confirm that the efficacy of our attack s stems from UTAP’s optimized delicate structure rather 
than the mere addition of noise, we conducted an ablation study using a random ly generated  noise 
perturbation of the same intensity level. For this experiment, we generated a random noise pattern with pixel 
values uniformly sampled within the same magnitude constraint of 𝜖 = 20 used for UTAP. As illustrated in 
Supplementary Fig. S7, adding this unstructured random noise to the input images had a negligible effect 
on the performance of all the tested foundation models. The classification accuracy remained high across the 
board, with only a minimal drop observed. This result demonstrates that the foundation models are inherently 
resilient to unstructured, random perturbations of this magnitude. It further underscores that the potency of 
UTAP is not simply a consequence of its energy or magnitude of the noise added  but is derived from i ts 
carefully crafted, adversarial structure, which is specifically optimized to disrupt the fundamental feature 
representations across pathology foundation models. 
 
While this work provides a comprehensive analysis of universal and transferable attacks, our investigation 
centered on the vulnerabilities of ViT -based foundation models, which are  currently the dominant design 
choice in almost all visual foundation models . We also expect that UTAP can be  extended with minor 

PAGE 17
 
17 
 
modifications to attack Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)-based models40 or hybrid models12,41 which 
is left as future work. 
 
Our evaluations in this work  were focused on the downstream task of tissue classification  on the image 
patch-level. Our approach can be further  extended to  other pathology tasks, such as semantic 
segmentation29,42 and cell counting43, to understand how these universal perturbations impact models' ability 
to perform fine -grained spatial analysis and quantification. Broadening the investigation across these 
dimensions will be essential for developing a truly holistic understanding of AI safety in digital pathology. 
Furthermore, it is crucial to investigate the impact of adversarial perturbations on WSI (whole slide image)-
level tasks. Many slide-level diagnostic models operate with weakly-supervised conditioning and aggregate 
features from numerous patche s in different ways. Most opt to use only feature vectors of their 
[CLS]/classification tokens through multi -instance learning45, cascaded transformer s29,44 or other 
architectures like LongNet 45,46. We expect that since the proposed attack successfully distorts these 
fundamental patch-level representations, the performance of any WSI-level model that depends on them will 
inevitably degrade as well. Extending the presented analysis to these multi-scale tasks will be important for 
a comprehensive view of AI safety. 
 
The rapid creation of a universal and transferable perturbation pattern, in less than 15 min of training time, 
carries significant implications for the clinical deployment and safety of AI in pathology. The demonstrated 
success of a transferable, black-box attack indicates that even proprietary—and potentially FDA-regulated—
diagnostic systems can be compromised without access to the model, posing a direct risk to patient safety. 
This vulnerability highlights the need for mandatory adversarial -robustness evaluation s and watchdog 

PAGE 18
 
18 
 
development efforts prior to deployment, extending beyond standard accuracy metrics to ensure resilience 
against sophisticated threats.  Crucially, this work provides both a rigorous benchmark and a practical 
pathway to defense. UTAP serves not only as a stress test for  foundation model robustness but also as a 
training signal for hardening models in practice. By incorporating UTAP -generated perturbations into 
adversarial training 47,48, developers can effectively “vaccinate” models against a broad class of s tealthy, 
transferable attacks. This strategy can potentially strengthen intrinsic safety, support regulatory confidence, 
and advance the reliable clinical adoption of AI in digital pathology. 
 
Methods 
Adversarial Attack Dataset and Pathology Foundation Models 
The primary dataset used in this study is the NCT -CRC-HE-100K (short as CRC-100K)35, a collection of 
100,000 non-overlapping image patches from H&E stained histological images of human colorectal cancer 
and normal tissue. All images are 224x224 pixels at a resolution of 0.5 µm per pixel with a 20x objective 
and were color-normalized using the Macenko's49 method. The dataset comprises nine manually annotated 
tissue classes: Adipose (ADI), background (BACK), debris (DEB), lymphocytes (LYM), mucus (MUC), 
smooth muscle (MUS), normal colon mucosa (NORM), cancer -associated stroma (STR), and colorectal 
adenocarcinoma epithelium (TUM). These images were manually extracted from 86 H&E-stained formalin-
fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) whole slides from the NCT Biobank and the UMM pathology archive, 
which included CRC primary tumors, liver metastases, and normal tissue regions from gastrectomy 
specimens to increase variability. For validation, an independent test set, CRC -V AL-HE-7K35, was used, 
containing 7,180 image patches from 50 patients with colorectal adenocarcinoma who were not part of the 
NCT-CRC-HE-100K (training) cohort. In the  further evaluation of  UTAP’s universality ( shown in 

PAGE 19
 
19 
 
Supplementary Fig. S4 ) on external datasets , we used the TCGA Uniform Tumor dataset 39, comprising 
1,608,060 image patches extracted from H&E-stained histological samples across 32 solid tumor types. To 
establish a simplified testbed, we restricted the label space to  a subset of  six representative classes —
Adrenocortical, Bladder, Cervical, Esophageal, Kidney, and Mesothelioma. Patches  from TCGA Uniform 
Tumor dataset originally sized 256 × 256 pixels were center cropped to 224 × 224 to match the input 
dimensions of the pre-optimized UTAP. 
 
We primarily used a foundation model pool containing the following seven pathology foundation models 
directly accessed from HuggingFace: [ MahmoodLab/UNI2-h, prov-gigapath/prov-gigapath, paige -
ai/Virchow2, paige-ai/Virchow, bioptimus/H-optimus-0, bioptimus/H0-mini, bioptimus/H-optimus-1]29–35. 
All the models have the vision transformer architecture as backbone, achieving state-of-the-art performances 
across multiple clinical downstream tasks in histopathology. A typical ViT forward pass partitions an image 
into non-overlapping patches, flattens each patch, and projects it with a trainable linear layer to obtain patch 
embeddings. A learned classification token ([CLS]) 50 is first prepended to the sequence and the learned 
positional embeddings are later added. The sequence then passes through a stack of Transformer encoder 
blocks, each composed of multi -head self-attention (via query, key, and value projections) and a multiple 
layer perceptron (MLP), with LayerNorm and residual connections51. While our experiments aim at attacking 
foundation models using ViT architectures with a 14-pixel patch size as default design choice, the approach 
is broadly applicable to ViTs with different patch encoding schemes, including patch sizes of 16 or 28 pixels. 
 
Visualization of Adversarial Perturbations 
To effectively visualize the structure of the adversarial perturbation, we superimposed the perturbation onto 

PAGE 20
 
20 
 
a uniform gray background (R , G, B values: [128, 128, 128]). This method makes subtle, high-frequency 
patterns of perturbation visible against a neutral gray image. For histogram analysis, the perturbation's RGB 
channels were averaged to create a single -channel intensity map. The histogram was then computed from 
the pixel intensity distribution of this grayscale representation. 
 
Parameters of Digital Implementation and Training Scheme 
For UTAP training, 𝑁 = 900 image patches of  224 × 224 pixels were sampled from the training dataset 
with 100 images per class. The original and attacked images were normalized using the same methods as the 
corresponding foundation model was trained with. UTAP was optimized for 𝐿 = 10 epochs iterating by  𝐵 =
5 images per batch. The perturbation was updated using adaptive PGD methods with 𝜃 = 10, step size 𝛼 =
𝜖𝜃𝐵
255×𝐿𝑁 = 4.35 × 10−4 and clamped to the range between [−𝜖, 𝜖] where 𝜖 = 20 after each iteration. 
 
The numerical simulations and the training process for UTAP were carried out using Python (version 3.11.15) 
and PyTorch (version 2.1.2, Meta Platform Inc.). The UTAP optimization underwent a 10-epoch training on 
a workstation equipped with an Nvidia GeForce RTX 4090 GPU, an Intel Core  i9-13900KF CPU, and 32 
GB RAM. The training time for a single UTAP (224 × 224 × 3 pixels) on 900 samples was ~13 minutes. 
 
Supplementary Information  
Supplementary Information includes: 
• Supplementary Figures S1-S7 
• Adversarial Perturbation Training and Evaluation 
• Training Loss Functions and Backend Classifier Training 

PAGE 21
 
21 
 
 
References 
1. Abels, E. et al. Computational pathology definitions, best practices, and recommendations for regulatory 
guidance: a white paper from the Digital Pathology Association. J. Pathol. 249, 286–294 (2019). 
2. Lu, M. Y . et al. AI-based pathology predicts origins for cancers of unknown primary. Nature 594, 106–
110 (2021). 
3. Bulten, W. et al. Artificial intelligence for diagnosis and Gleason grading of prostate cancer: the PANDA 
challenge. Nat. Med. 28, 154–163 (2022). 
4. Xiong, C. et al. TAKT: Target-Aware Knowledge Transfer for Whole Slide Image Classification. (2024). 
5. Huang, L. et al. A robust and scalable framework for hallucination detection in virtual tissue staining and 
digital pathology. Nat. Biomed. Eng.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01421-9 (2025) 
doi:10.1038/s41551-025-01421-9. 
6. Lu, M. Y . et al. A multimodal generative AI copilot for human pathology. Nature 634, 466–473 (2024). 
7. Oquab, M. et al. DINOv2: Learning Robust Visual Features without Supervision. (2024). 
8. Siméoni, O. et al. DINOv3. (2025). 
9. Caron, M. et al. Emerging Properties in Self-Supervised Vision Transformers. (2021). 
10. Zhou, J. et al. iBOT: Image BERT Pre-Training with Online Tokenizer. (2022). 
11. Krishnan, R., Rajpurkar , P. & Topol, E. J. Self -supervised learning in medicine and healthcare. Nat. 
Biomed. Eng. 6, 1346–1352 (2022). 
12. Dosovitskiy, A. et al. An Image is Worth 16x16 Words: Transformers for Image Recognition at Scale. 
(2021). 
13. Sun, Y ., Wang, L., Li, G., Lin, W. & Wang, L. A foundation model for enhancing magnetic resonance 

PAGE 22
 
22 
 
images and downstream segmentation, registration and diagnostic tasks. Nat. Biomed. Eng. 9, 521–538 
(2025). 
14. Noh, S. & Lee, B. -D. A narrative review of foundation models for medical image segmentation: zero -
shot performance evaluation on diverse modalities. Quant. Imaging Med. Surg. 15, 5825–5858 (2025). 
15. Lee, H. H. et al. Foundation Models for Biomedical Image Segmentation: A Survey. (2024). 
16. Gu, H., Dong, H., Yang, J. & Mazurowski, M. A. How to build the best medical image segmentation 
algorithm using foundation models: a comprehensive empirical study with Segment Anything Model. 
Mach. Learn. Biomed. Imaging 3, 88–120 (2025). 
17. Neidlinger, P. et al.  Benchmarking foundation models as feature extractors for weakly supervised 
computational pathology. Nat. Biomed. Eng.  https://doi.org/10.1038/s41551-025-01516-3 (2025) 
doi:10.1038/s41551-025-01516-3. 
18. Ghaffari Laleh, N. et al. Adversarial attacks and adversarial robustness in computational pathology. Nat. 
Commun. 13, 5711 (2022). 
19. Inkawhich, N., McDonald, G. & Luley, R. Adversarial Attacks on Foundational Vision Models. (2023). 
20. Thota, P. et al. Demonstration of an Adversarial Attack Against a Multimodal Vision Language Model 
for Pathology Imaging. (2024). 
21.Bortsova, G. et al. Adversarial attack vulnerability of medical image analysis systems: Unexplored factors. 
Med. Image Anal. 73, 102141 (2021). 
22. Li, Y . & Liu, S. Adversarial Attack and Defense in Breast Cancer Deep Learning Systems. Bioeng. Basel 
Switz. 10, (2023). 
23. Fu, Y ., Zhang, S., Wu, S., Wan, C. & Lin, Y . C. Patch-Fool: Are Vision Transformers Always Robust 
Against Adversarial Perturbations? (2025). 

PAGE 23
 
23 
 
24. Gu, J., Tresp, V . & Qin, Y . Are Vision Transformers Robust to&nbsp;Patch Perturbations? in Computer 
Vision – ECCV 2022: 17th European Conference, Tel Aviv, Israel, October 23 –27, 2022, Proceedings, 
Part XII 404–421 (Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2022). doi:10.1007/978-3-031-19775-8_24. 
25. Lovisotto, G., Finnie, N., Munoz, M., Mummadi, C. K. & Metzen, J. H. Give Me Your Attention: Dot -
Product Attention Considered Harmful for Adversarial Patch Robustness. (2022). 
26. Szegedy, C. et al. Intriguing properties of neural networks. (2014). 
27. Carlini, N. & Wagner, D. Towards Evaluating the Robustness of Neural Networks. (2017). 
28. Madry, A., Makelov, A., Schmidt, L., Tsipras, D. & Vladu, A. Towards Deep Learning Models Resistant 
to Adversarial Attacks. (2019). 
29. Chen, R. J. et al. Towards a general-purpose foundation model for computational pathology. Nat. Med. 
30, 850–862 (2024). 
30. Xu, H. et al. A whole-slide foundation model for digital pathology from real -world data. Nature 630, 
181–188 (2024). 
31. V orontsov, E. et al. A foundation model for clinical -grade computational pathology and rare cancers 
detection. Nat. Med. 30, 2924–2935 (2024). 
32. Zimmermann, E. et al. Virchow2: Scaling Self-Supervised Mixed Magnification Models in Pathology. 
(2024). 
33. Saillard, C. et al. H-optimus-0. (2024). 
34. Filiot, A. et al. Distilling foundation models for robust and efficient models in digital pathology. (2025). 
35. Bioptimus. H-optimus-1. (2025). 
36. Kather, J. N., Halama, N. & Marx, A. 100,000 histological images of human colorectal cancer and healthy 
tissue. https://zenodo.org/records/1214456 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.1214456 (2018). 

PAGE 24
 
24 
 
37. Wei, Z. et al. Towards Transferable Adversarial Attacks on Vision Transformers. Proc. AAAI Conf. Artif. 
Intell. 36, 2668–2676 (2022). 
38. McInnes, L., Healy, J. & Melville, J. UMAP: Uniform Manifold Approximation and Projection for 
Dimension Reduction. (2020). 
39. Goodfellow, I. J., Shlens, J. & Szegedy, C. Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Examples. (2015). 
40. Daisuke, K. & Shumpei, I. Histology images from uniform tumor regions in TCGA Whole Slide Images. 
https://zenodo.org/records/3373439 https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3373439 (2020). 
41. Lu, M. Y . et al. Data-efficient and weakly supervised computational pathology on whole -slide images. 
Nat. Biomed. Eng. 5, 555–570 (2021). 
42. Liu, Z. et al. A ConvNet for the 2020s. (2022). 
43. Chen, Z. et al.  Segment Anything in Pathology Images with Natural Language. Preprint at 
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2506.20988 (2025). 
44. V orontsov, E. et al. A foundation model for clinical -grade computational pathology and rare cancers 
detection. Nat. Med. 30, 2924–2935 (2024). 
45. Chen, R. J. et al. Scaling Vision Transformers to Gigapixel Images via Hierarchical Self -Supervised 
Learning. (2022). 
46. Chen, Y . et al.  SlideChat: A Large Vision -Language Assistant for Whole -Slide Pathology Image 
Understanding. (2025). 
47. Ding, J. et al. LongNet: Scaling Transformers to 1,000,000,000 Tokens. (2023). 
48. Tao, S., Shen, H., Cao, Q., Hou, L. & Cheng, X. Adversarial Immunization for Certifiable Robustness on 
Graphs. in Proceedings of the 14th ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining 698–
706 (ACM, 2021). doi:10.1145/3437963.3441782. 

PAGE 25
 
25 
 
49. Zhao, M. et al. Adversarial Training: A Survey. (2024). 
50. Macenko, M. et al. A method for normalizing histology slides for quantitative analysis. in 2009 IEEE 
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro  1107–1110 (2009). 
doi:10.1109/ISBI.2009.5193250. 
51. Devlin, J., Chang, M. -W., Lee, K. & Toutanova, K. BERT: Pre -training of Deep Bidirectional 
Transformers for Language Understanding. (2019). 
52. Vaswani, A. et al. Attention Is All You Need. (2023). 
53. Radford, A. et al. Learning Transferable Visual Models From Natural Language Supervision. (2021). 
54. Liu, D. C. & Nocedal, J. On the limited memory BFGS method for large scale optimization. Math. 
Program. 45, 503–528 (1989). 
55. Lucambio Pérez, L. R. & Prudente, L. F. A Wolfe Line Search Algorithm for Vector Optimization. ACM 
Trans Math Softw 45, (2019). 
 
  
 
  

PAGE 26
 
26 
 
Figures 
 
Figure 1. Workflow of Universal and Transferable Adversarial Perturbation (UTAP) training and 
evaluation. Top row shows the process of UTAP training which minimizes the cosine similarity of original 
and attacked features extracted from a frozen foundation model. The bottom row is the evaluation process 
of UTAP attack, where the attacked images were passed through a frozen foundation model used for 
training (internal generalization) and unseen, black-box foundation models (external generalization) 
cascaded with their respectively pretrained linear classifiers. The fire and snowflake symbols indicate 
whether the parameters are trainable or frozen/fixed. 
  


PAGE 27
 
27 
 
 
Figure 2. UTAP attack results on CRC-100K dataset. (a) Visualization of the optimized UTAP with the 
original and attacked images of three classes (‘ADI’ for adipose, ‘LYM’ for lymphocytes and ‘NORM’ for 
normal colon mucosa) sampled from the CRC-100K dataset. (b) The histogram of UTAP perturbation, 
bounded in the range of ±𝜖, where 𝜖 = 20. (c) The original (green), attacked (blue) and dropped (red) 


PAGE 28
 
28 
 
classification accuracy values on the internal attack (the foundation model used for UTAP training) and 
various external attacks (for unseen foundation models). (d) the UMAP projections into the 2D space of the 
original features and the attacked features. (e) The PCA projections into the 2D space of the original 
features and the attacked features. 
  

PAGE 29
 
29 
 
 
Figure 3. Original and UTAP attacked attention maps extracted by a pathology foundation model 
(UNI2-h). Visualization of the cosine similarity between the [CLS] token and all positional patch tokens 
for tissue samples from three different classes (ADI, LYM, and NORM). For the original images (left 
column), the foundation model exhibits coherent attention, with high similarity (red color) correctly 
localized on salient tissue structures, as desired and expected. After applying the UTAP attack (right 
column), these attention patterns result in disorganized and scattered states. This provides direct evidence 


PAGE 30
 
30 
 
that UTAP fundamentally corrupts the foundation model’s core feature extraction capabilities. The 
attention maps are calculated using UNI2-h model. 
  

PAGE 31
 
31 
 
 
Figure 4. Cross-model transferability of UTAP. The matrix displays the attack performance of UTAP 
perturbations trained on each foundation model (rows) when evaluated against all the other foundation 
models in the test set (columns). The diagonal elements, highlighted by the green dashed boxes, represent 
the internal attacks, while the off-diagonal elements represent the external attacks on new foundation 
models never seen before. In each subplot, the blue bar indicates the original accuracy of the target model, 
and the red bar shows the accuracy after the UTAP attack. 
  


PAGE 32
 
32 
 
 
Figure 5. Ablation study on UTAP hyperparameters 𝜽 and 𝝐. (a) Visualization of UTAP attack with a 
fixed perturbation magnitude 𝜖 and varying step-size scaling factor 𝜃. Each row shows the resulting 
perturbation histogram, UTAP visualization, and the attacked image. (b) The classification accuracy of 
seven foundation models (including internal and external attacks) as a function of 𝜃. (c) Visualization of 


PAGE 33
 
33 
 
UTAP attacks with a fixed 𝜃 and varying 𝜖. (d) The classification accuracy of seven foundation models 
(including internal and external attacks) as a function of 𝜖. 
  

PAGE 34
 
34 
 
 
Figure 6. Workflow of Patch Specific Adversarial Perturbation (PSAP) training and evaluation. The 
top row shows the process of PSAP training, where the patch-specific perturbations were added to the 
original image patches and were optimized to maximize the cross entropy of the ground truth label and the 
classification probability extracted from the pretrained frozen linear classifier. The remaining rows show 


PAGE 35
 
35 
 
the process of PSAP evaluation on trained (middle row) and new (bottom row) image patches. The fire and 
snowflake symbols indicate whether the parameters are trainable or frozen/fixed. 
  

PAGE 36
 
36 
 
 
Figure 7. Workflow of Class Specific Adversarial Perturbation (CSAP) training and evaluation. The 
top row shows the process of CSAP training, where the class-specific perturbations were added to the 
original image patches of a specific data class and were optimized to maximize the cross entropy of the 


PAGE 37
 
37 
 
ground truth label and the classification probability extracted from the pretrained frozen linear classifier. 
The remaining rows show the process of CSAP evaluation on trained (middle row) and new (bottom row) 
image patches. The fire and snowflake symbols indicate whether the parameters are trainable or 
frozen/fixed. 
  

PAGE 38
 
38 
 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of adversarial attack strategies and their generalization. The green bar 
indicates the original classification accuracy. The classification accuracies were evaluated on CRC-100K 
dataset using the UNI2-h foundation model. The attacked classification accuracy values on the 
original/training and new/testing image patches are shown with the blue and red bars, respectively. The 
methods of applying these three categories of perturbations are shown in Fig. 1, Fig. 6 and Fig. 7. 
 
