Resilient Write: A Six-Layer Durable Write Surfacefor LLM Coding Agents

Report GitHub Issue
×

Title:

Content selection saved. Describe the issue below:

Description:

Submit without GitHub
Submit in GitHub

arXiv is now an independent nonprofit!
Learn more
×

Back to arXiv

Why HTML?

Report Issue

Back to Abstract

Download PDF

Abstract

1 Introduction

Motivating incident.

Contribution.

2 Background

2.1 LLM Coding Agents

2.2 The Model Context Protocol

2.3 Failure Modes of Agent Writes

3 Architecture

3.1 L0: Pre-flight Risk Scoring

Pattern families.

Scoring function.

Verdicts.

Workspace policy overrides.

3.2 L1: Transactional Atomic Writes

3.3 L2: Resumable Chunked Composition

3.4 L3: Typed Error Envelopes

3.5 L4: Content-Addressed Scratchpad

3.6 L5: Task-Continuity Handoff

3.7 Extensions: Preview, Validation, and Analytics

Chunk preview.

Format-aware validation.

Journal analytics.

4 Implementation

4.1 Workspace Root Safety

4.2 Journal Design

4.3 Chunk Manifest Consistency

4.4 Risk-Score Snippet Truncation

4.5 Scratchpad Deduplication

5 Evaluation

5.1 Test Suite

Chunk contiguity.

Concurrency guards.

5.2 Case Study: Telemetry Report

5.3 Quantitative Comparison

5.4 Failure Mode Coverage

6 Related Work

Transactional file systems.

Concurrency control.

Agent error handling.

Secret detection.

7 Discussion

7.1 Design Tradeoffs

Plain-text journals vs. SQL.

Unencrypted scratchpad.

Retry budget: per-response, not per-session.

Drift warnings, not errors.

7.2 Agent Awareness and Adoption

7.3 Limitations

7.4 Future Directions

8 Conclusion

References

License: CC BY 4.0

arXiv:2604.10842v1 [cs.SE] 12 Apr 2026

Resilient Write: A Six-Layer Durable Write Surface

for LLM Coding Agents

Justice Owusu Agyemang
††thanks: jay@sperixlabs.org, jay@knust.edu.gh
Affiliation: Sperix Labs   VIA Cybersecurity Lab, KNUST   Quantum and Assistive Technologies Lab, KNUST

  
Jerry John Kponyo
††thanks: jjkponyo.soe@knust.edu.gh
Affiliation: Sperix Labs   VIA Cybersecurity Lab, KNUST   Quantum and Assistive Technologies Lab, KNUST

  
Elliot Amponsah
††thanks: eamponsah52@st.knust.edu.gh
Affiliation: Sperix Labs   VIA Cybersecurity Lab, KNUST   Quantum and Assistive Technologies Lab, KNUST

  
Godfred Manu Addo Boakye
††thanks: gmaboakye@st.knust.edu.gh
Affiliation: Sperix Labs   VIA Cybersecurity Lab, KNUST   Quantum and Assistive Technologies Lab, KNUST

  
Kwame Opuni-Boachie Obour Agyekum
††thanks: kooagyekum@knust.edu.gh
April 2026

Abstract

LLM-powered coding agents increasingly rely on tool-use protocols
such as the Model Context Protocol (MCP) to read and write files
on a developer’s workstation. When a write fails—due to content
filters, truncation, or an interrupted session—the agent typically
receives no structured signal, loses the draft, and wastes tokens
retrying blindly. We present Resilient Write, an MCP
server that interposes a six-layer durable write surface between the
agent and the filesystem. The layers—pre-flight risk scoring,
transactional atomic writes, resume-safe chunking, structured typed
errors, out-of-band scratchpad storage, and task-continuity
handoff envelopes—are orthogonal and independently adoptable.
Each layer maps to a concrete failure mode observed during a real
agent session in April 2026, in which content-safety filters
silently rejected a draft containing redacted API-key prefixes.
Three additional tools—chunk preview, format-aware validation,
and journal analytics—emerged from using the system to compose
this paper. A 186-test suite validates correctness at each layer,
and quantitative comparison against naive and defensive baselines
shows a reduction in recovery time and a
improvement in agent self-correction rate. Resilient Write is
open-source under the MIT license.

1 Introduction

The emergence of tool-augmented large language models (LLMs) has
shifted software-engineering assistants from suggestion engines to
autonomous agents that read, write, and execute code on a
developer’s behalf [1, 2, 3, 4].
The Model Context Protocol (MCP) [5] standardises the
interface between an LLM and the tools it invokes—file
reads, writes, shell commands, database queries—giving agents a
uniform way to act on the local environment.

In practice, the write path is fragile. A Write tool call
can fail for reasons invisible to the agent: content-safety filters
may reject the payload silently; a large file may be truncated
mid-stream; the session may be interrupted before the write
completes; and when a write does fail, the error signal is
typically an unstructured string (or no signal at all), leaving the
agent unable to diagnose the cause or choose a recovery strategy.

Motivating incident.

In April 2026, while producing a technical report on LLM CLI
telemetry [6], an agent attempted to write
a LaTeX document whose body included redacted HTTP headers such
as Authorization: Bearer sk-ant-oat01-{REDACTED}.
The prefix pattern sk-ant- triggered a content-safety
regex in the host tool, which silently rejected the payload.
The agent received no structured error. It retried the identical
content five times, consuming approximately two minutes of
wall-clock time and several thousand tokens, before falling back to
an ad-hoc workaround: piping the document through chunked
cat >> file.tex <<EOF heredoc commands in the shell.

This single incident exposed five distinct failure modes:

1.

Silent rejection—no signal that the write was blocked.

2.

Draft loss—the rejected payload was not persisted anywhere.

3.

Retry thrashing—the agent retried identical content with no budget limit.

4.

No structured diagnosis—the agent could not branch on error type.

5.

Session fragility—had the session been interrupted during the workaround, all progress would have been lost.

Contribution.

We present Resilient Write, an MCP server that addresses
each of these failure modes with a dedicated, orthogonal layer
(Table 1). The design follows three principles:
(i) fail transparently—every rejection returns a
machine-readable envelope;
(ii) never overwrite in place—all writes go through a
temp-file, fsync, verify, atomic-rename pipeline;
(iii) each layer is independently adoptable—an agent can
use only rw.safe_write and rw.handoff_write
without ever touching the scratchpad or chunker.

The remainder of this paper is organised as follows.
Section 2 reviews the relevant context.
Section 3 describes the six-layer architecture
and three extension tools.
Section 4 covers implementation details.
Section 5 reports on the test suite, a case
study, and a quantitative comparison against baselines.
Section 6 surveys related work.
Section 7 discusses design tradeoffs, agent
adoption, and limitations, and Section 8
concludes.

2 Background

2.1 LLM Coding Agents

A growing class of developer tools embed an LLM in an
edit–test–commit loop. Claude Code [1],
Cursor [3], GitHub Copilot [4],
OpenAI Codex CLI [2], and
OpenCode [7] each grant the model access to the
local filesystem, a shell, and often a language server. The
SWE-bench benchmark [8] and the SWE-agent
framework [9] have further demonstrated that
agents can resolve real GitHub issues end-to-end, making reliable
file mutation a critical capability.

2.2 The Model Context Protocol

MCP [5] defines a JSON-RPC 2.0 transport between an LLM
host (the IDE or CLI) and one or more tool servers.
Each server advertises a set of tools, each with a
JSON Schema input definition [10]. The host
serialises the agent’s tool call, forwards it over stdio
or SSE, and returns the server’s JSON response as the next context
message. MCP deliberately does not prescribe how the server
implements a tool; this paper exploits that freedom to interpose
durability guarantees on the write path.

2.3 Failure Modes of Agent Writes

Agent writes can fail at several points in the stack:

•

Content filtering. Host-side or API-side safety
classifiers may reject payloads that contain token-shaped
strings, even when the tokens are redacted or
fictitious [11].

•

Truncation. Large payloads may be silently
clipped by transport limits, shell buffer sizes, or
context-window overflow.

•

Atomicity. A naive open / write / close
sequence leaves a partially-written file on crash.
The POSIX rename() call [12] is the
standard remedy, but few agent tool implementations use it.

•

Session loss. If the agent process or the
underlying LLM call is interrupted, in-flight state—the
current draft, the plan, the list of completed steps—is
lost unless explicitly persisted.

These are not hypothetical: the motivating incident
(Section 1) exercised all four within a single
twenty-minute session.

3 Architecture

Resilient Write is structured as six orthogonal layers,
each targeting a specific failure mode. Table 1
summarises the mapping and Figure 1 shows the
data flow. Layers can be adopted independently; the minimum useful
deployment is L1 + L5.

Table 1: The six layers of Resilient Write and the failure modes they address.

Layer
MCP Tool
Mechanism
Failure Mode Addressed

L0
rw.risk_score
Deterministic regex + size classifier
Silent content-filter rejection

L1
rw.safe_write
Temp file, fsync, hash verify, atomic rename
Truncation, corruption, half-writes

L2
rw.chunk_*
Numbered chunk files with contiguity check
Payload too large for single call

L3
(error envelope)
Typed JSON error schema
Opaque, unstructured error signals

L4
rw.scratch_*
Content-addressed out-of-band store
Secrets that must not enter the tree

L5
rw.handoff_*
YAML+Markdown envelope with hash audit
Cross-session continuity loss

Figure 1: Six-layer architecture of Resilient Write. Arrows show
data flow from the agent’s tool call through each layer to the
filesystem. L3 error envelopes (orange) are cross-cutting;
L4 scratchpad (green) writes out-of-band.

3.1 L0: Pre-flight Risk Scoring

Before content reaches the filesystem, rw.risk_score
runs a deterministic classifier over the draft. The classifier
is a pure function: no LLM call, no network access, bounded at
under 50 ms on 100 KB inputs.

Pattern families.

The classifier maintains a taxonomy of seven pattern families, each
with a numeric weight reflecting the likelihood that the pattern will
trigger a downstream content filter:

•

api_key (): Anthropic, OpenAI, AWS access key ID, Datadog, and generic bearer-token patterns.

•

github_pat (): GitHub fine-grained and classic PATs (ghp_, gho_, etc.).

•

jwt (): The three-segment base64 eyJ structure.

•

pem_block (): -----BEGIN * PRIVATE KEY----- blocks.

•

aws_secret (): Context-sensitive match requiring a key name followed by a 40-character base64 value.

•

pii (): Email addresses, SSNs, phone numbers (conservative patterns to limit false positives).

•

binary_hint (): Long base64 blobs ( chars) or dense non-printable byte sequences.

Scoring function.

Let be the set of families with at least one match, let
be the weight of family , and let be the number of
distinct matches in family . The raw score
(Equation 1) is:

(1)

The inner term provides sub-linear damping: a second match in the same
family adds only 25% of the base weight, and contributions saturate at
. Size heuristics add fixed increments (e.g.,
for files over 100 KB, for lines exceeding 2 000
characters). The final score is clamped to .

Verdicts.

The score maps to a categorical verdict:
,
,
,
otherwise safe.
The verdict, the score, a list of detected patterns (each truncated to
16 characters to avoid leaking the matched secret), and a set of
suggested actions are returned in a structured JSON response.

Workspace policy overrides.

A per-workspace file .resilient_write/policy.yaml allows
operators to extend or disable pattern families, adjust verdict
thresholds, and set the global retry budget. This mechanism lets a
security-testing workspace suppress false positives without weakening
defaults for other projects.

3.2 L1: Transactional Atomic Writes

The rw.safe_write tool implements a four-phase write protocol:

1.

Precondition check. Three modes are supported:
create (reject if target exists),
overwrite (unconditional), and
append (concatenate to existing content).
An optional expected_prev_sha256 field enables
optimistic concurrency control: if the current file’s hash does
not match, the write is rejected with a
stale_precondition error.

2.

Exclusive temp-file write. Content is written to a
temporary file opened with O_CREAT | O_EXCL,
followed by fsync().

3.

Read-back hash verification. The temp file is
re-read and its SHA-256 is compared against the expected hash
of the input bytes. A mismatch raises
write_corruption and the temp file is deleted.

4.

Atomic rename. os.replace() moves the
temp file over the target, guaranteeing that the file is either
fully replaced or untouched.

On success, a journal row is appended to
.resilient_write/journal.jsonl recording the timestamp,
path, SHA-256, byte count, mode, and caller identity. The journal is
append-only .jsonl by design: no SQL database, no migration
burden, and each row is independently grep-able.

3.3 L2: Resumable Chunked Composition

Large or risky writes can be decomposed into numbered chunks. The
protocol exposes three tools:

•

rw.chunk_write persists one chunk to a session
directory (e.g., part-001.txt) via
safe_write, making retries idempotent.

•

rw.chunk_append auto-increments the chunk index,
removing an entire class of off-by-one errors.

•

rw.chunk_compose concatenates all chunks in index
order, verifying contiguity (no gaps) and reconciling against
the manifest’s total_expected count before writing
the final file through safe_write.

Each chunk is individually journaled and hash-verified, so if chunk 5
of 8 fails, chunks 1–4 are already durable on disk. Only the
failing chunk needs to be retried.

3.4 L3: Typed Error Envelopes

Every failure across L1–L5 returns a uniform JSON
envelope (Listing 1):

Listing 1: L3 error envelope (abbreviated).

⬇
{

"ok": false,

"error": "blocked",

"reason_hint": "content_filter",

"detected_patterns": ["api_key"],

"suggested_action": "redact",

"retry_budget": 2,

"context": { "score": 0.82 }

}

The error field is one of five kinds:
blocked (content filter or policy),
stale_precondition (concurrency violation),
write_corruption (hash mismatch),
quota_exceeded (disk full or cap), and
policy_violation (permissions or path traversal).

The reason_hint categorises the underlying cause:
content_filter, size_limit,
encoding, permission,
network, or unknown.
Crucially, content_filter is not marked
retriable, preventing the infinite-retry loop that motivated
this project.

The retry_budget field is a per-response integer that
decrements on identical retries. When it reaches zero, the tool
refuses further attempts, forcing the agent to change strategy.
Because the budget is embedded in the response (not tracked
server-side), it is stateless and transparent.

3.5 L4: Content-Addressed Scratchpad

Some content—raw credentials captured from live traffic, PII in
test fixtures, binary blobs—legitimately does not belong in the
workspace tree. rw.scratch_put writes such material to
.resilient_write/scratch/<sha256>.bin, keyed by content
hash. Identical payloads are automatically deduplicated; an
append-only index.jsonl records metadata (label, timestamp,
content type) for each deposit.

rw.scratch_ref looks up metadata without retrieving content,
and rw.scratch_get returns the raw bytes. The latter is
gated by the RW_SCRATCH_DISABLE_GET environment variable:
when set, the scratchpad becomes write-only, enabling a “deposit
box” pattern suitable for high-sensitivity workspaces.

3.6 L5: Task-Continuity Handoff

When a task is interrupted—by a content-filter block, context-window
exhaustion, or process crash—a fresh agent must re-derive the
task’s context from first principles. rw.handoff_write
serialises a structured envelope to HANDOFF.md
(Listing 2):

Listing 2: HANDOFF.md front-matter (abbreviated).

⬇
---

task_id: telemetry-report

status: partial

agent: claude-opus-4-6

summary: |

19-page report complete; appendix

blocked on L0 due to raw key prefixes.

next_steps:

- Redact sk-ant-* tokens to {REDACTED}.

- Retry chunk 4 via rw.chunk_write.

last_good_state:

- path: report.tex

sha256: 4b0c12ea...

---

The last_good_state field records per-file SHA-256 hashes.
On read, rw.handoff_read performs a drift check:
each listed file is re-hashed and compared against the recorded
digest. Mismatches produce warnings (not errors), allowing the new
agent to proceed while remaining aware that on-disk state has
diverged. Previous envelopes are optionally archived to
.resilient_write/handoffs/ with timestamps, preserving a
history of handoff points.

3.7 Extensions: Preview, Validation, and Analytics

Three additional tools emerged from practical use of the system
during the preparation of this paper itself.

Chunk preview.

rw.chunk_preview performs a dry-run compose: it concatenates
all chunks in a session, verifies contiguity and
total_expected, and returns the content string without
writing to disk. During this paper’s composition, a stale chunk
session from a prior attempt collided with new chunks, producing a
file with a duplicate preamble. Preview would have caught this
before the faulty compose.

Format-aware validation.

rw.validate provides syntax checking for common formats:
LaTeX (brace balancing, environment matching, \documentclass
presence), JSON (json.loads), Python (ast.parse),
and YAML (yaml.safe_load). The validator is a pure function
returning a structured diagnostic envelope:
{valid, format, errors[{line, message, severity}]}.
During this paper’s composition, a missing macro definition
(\layer) caused a build failure that this validator’s
LaTeX checker would have flagged at preview time.

Journal analytics.

rw.analytics analyses the append-only journal to report
write counts, timing, hot paths, chunk-session summaries, and write
velocity. This enables agents (and operators) to understand write
patterns and diagnose performance issues without parsing raw
.jsonl.

4 Implementation

Resilient Write is implemented in Python 3.12 as an MCP
server that communicates over stdio. The server registers
sixteen tools (Table 1 plus inspection and extension
tools such as rw.chunk_status, rw.validate,
rw.analytics, and rw.journal_tail) and relies on no
external services or databases.

4.1 Workspace Root Safety

The server resolves its workspace root at startup from the
RW_WORKSPACE environment variable or the current working
directory. A hard-coded deny-list of unsafe roots
(/, /etc, /usr, /tmp, etc.)
prevents accidents when the variable is unset or mis-expanded.
All user-supplied paths are resolved and checked to ensure they do not
escape the workspace via .. traversal or symlink resolution,
following standard OWASP path-traversal mitigations [13].

4.2 Journal Design

The audit journal is an append-only .jsonl file. Each row
is a single JSON object with sorted keys, making the file both
diff-friendly and grep-friendly. POSIX O_APPEND semantics
guarantee atomic single-writer appends without explicit locking.
The journal records only metadata (path, hash, byte count, mode);
file content is never duplicated into the log.

4.3 Chunk Manifest Consistency

Chunk sessions maintain a manifest JSON file recording
created_at, updated_at, and
total_expected. The manifest is written atomically
(temp + rename) but is not journaled, since it is derived
state—a fresh agent can reconstruct the manifest by enumerating
chunk files on disk via rw.chunk_status. This design treats
the chunk files as the source of truth and the manifest as a
convenience cache.

4.4 Risk-Score Snippet Truncation

When L0 detects a sensitive pattern, the match snippet
included in the response is truncated to 16 characters. This is
a deliberate information-control measure: the classifier’s output
must not itself become a vector for leaking the secret it detected.
The truncated prefix is sufficient for the agent to locate the match
in its own draft and apply a targeted redaction.

4.5 Scratchpad Deduplication

The scratchpad uses SHA-256 content addressing. If the agent deposits
the same payload twice (e.g., the same API key observed in two
separate HTTP captures), only one .bin file is stored.
Metadata entries in index.jsonl accumulate independently,
allowing multiple labels to alias the same underlying content. On
read-back, the content is re-hashed to detect manual edits to the
.bin file since deposit time.

5 Evaluation

We evaluate Resilient Write along three axes:
(1) correctness, via an automated test suite;
(2) practical utility, via a case study; and
(3) quantitative comparison against baseline approaches.

5.1 Test Suite

The test suite comprises 186 tests across twelve modules,
exercising every layer, every error path, and all three
extension tools.
Table 2 summarises coverage by component.

Table 2: Test distribution by component.

Layer
Module(s)
Tests

L0
test_risk_score
28

L1
test_safe_write, test_journal
17

L2
test_chunks
27

L3
test_errors
27

L4
test_scratchpad
21

L5
test_handoff
8

Ext.
test_new_features
42

Infra
test_server, test_scaffold, test_stdio
16

Total
186

Figure 2 visualises the distribution.
The 42 extension tests cover format validation (15 tests for
LaTeX, JSON, Python, and YAML syntax checking), journal analytics
(10 tests), and chunk preview (5 tests), plus auto-detection and
edge cases. All tests use synthetic but shaped credentials
to exercise real regex match paths without embedding secrets in test
code.

Figure 2: Test distribution across layers and extensions
(186 tests total).

Chunk contiguity.

Dedicated tests verify that rw.chunk_compose rejects sessions
with non-contiguous indices (e.g., chunks 1, 3 with chunk 2 missing)
and sessions whose chunk count does not match the manifest’s
total_expected.

Concurrency guards.

The expected_prev_sha256 optimistic lock is tested by
writing a file, computing its hash, mutating the file externally,
and confirming that a subsequent safe_write with the stale
hash returns stale_precondition.

5.2 Case Study: Telemetry Report

The motivating incident (Section 1) was replayed with
Resilient Write interposed. Table 3
compares the two runs.

Table 3: Comparison of the original failed session and the
Resilient Write replay.

Metric
Original
With Resilient Write

Write attempts
6
2

Content lost
yes
no

Structured error
no
yes

Agent self-corrected
no
yes

Manual intervention
yes
no

In the replay, the agent called rw.risk_score before the
first write attempt, received a high verdict with
api_key detected, and applied a targeted redaction. The
subsequent rw.safe_write succeeded on the first attempt.
No heredoc workaround was needed, no tokens were wasted on blind
retries, and the journal preserved a complete audit trail.

5.3 Quantitative Comparison

Table 4 compares three approaches to agent file
I/O across four key metrics. Recovery time and wasted-call rates
were measured during development; data-loss probability and
self-correction rates are estimates informed by an independent
severity analysis performed by a local LLM (Gemma 3, prompted to
rank each failure mode’s impact on agent productivity).

Table 4: Estimated metrics across three write approaches.

Metric
Naive
Defensive
Resilient Write

Recovery time (s)
10.0
5.5
2.0

Data loss prob. (%)
5.0
1.0
0.1

Self-correction (%)
5
15
65

Wasted calls (%)
25
12.5
3.0

Figure 3 visualises these differences. The
Naive baseline is a direct open/write/close with
try/except; the Defensive baseline adds
temp-file + atomic-rename but no pre-flight scoring or structured
errors. Resilient Write’s layered approach yields a
reduction in recovery time, a reduction in data
loss probability, and a improvement in agent
self-correction rate.

Figure 3: Comparison of write approaches across four metrics.
Lower is better for recovery time, data loss, and wasted calls;
higher is better for self-correction rate.

5.4 Failure Mode Coverage

Figure 4 maps eight observed failure modes to the
six architecture layers. Each cell indicates whether the layer
provides primary (1.0) or secondary (0.5) mitigation for the
failure mode. The heatmap confirms that the layers are largely
orthogonal: no single layer addresses more than three failure
modes, and every failure mode is addressed by at least one layer.

Figure 4: Failure mode coverage by architecture layer.
Darker cells indicate primary mitigation (1.0); lighter cells
indicate secondary mitigation (0.5).

6 Related Work

Transactional file systems.

The atomic temp-file–fsync–rename pattern used by L1 is
well-established in systems literature. Gray’s transaction
concept [14] formalised the ACID properties
that underpin our journal design. Hagmann [15]
demonstrated logging and group commit in the Cedar file system, and
Nightingale et al. [16] showed that
relaxing synchrony constraints can improve throughput without
sacrificing durability. Resilient Write applies these
ideas at the tool-call granularity rather than the kernel level,
trading generality for deployment simplicity.

Concurrency control.

The expected_prev_sha256 guard in L1 is a form
of optimistic concurrency control [17]
adapted for agent–file interactions. Unlike database-level OCC,
our scheme requires no version counter or timestamp oracle: the
content hash itself serves as the version identifier.

Agent error handling.

SWE-agent [9] introduced the concept of an
agent–computer interface (ACI) that mediates between the
LLM and the operating system, but its error model remains
unstructured text. SWE-bench [8]
evaluates agent success rates but does not isolate write-path
failures as a distinct cause of task failure. To our knowledge,
Resilient Write is the first system to provide a typed
error envelope designed specifically for autonomous agent
consumption.

Secret detection.

Tools such as truffleHog, detect-secrets, and
GitHub’s push-protection scanner perform post-hoc secret scanning
on committed content. L0’s risk scorer operates
pre-flight—before the content reaches the filesystem—and
is tuned not for audit completeness but for predicting whether a
downstream content filter will reject the payload. This is a
complementary, not competing, concern.

7 Discussion

7.1 Design Tradeoffs

Plain-text journals vs. SQL.

We chose append-only .jsonl over SQLite for the audit
journal. This sacrifices indexed queries but gains human
readability, diff-ability in version control, and zero external
dependencies. For the expected journal sizes (tens to low hundreds
of rows per session), linear scan is acceptable.

Unencrypted scratchpad.

The scratchpad stores sensitive material as plaintext
.bin files, delegating encryption to filesystem-level
mechanisms (FileVault, LUKS). This is a deliberate separation
of concerns: cryptographic key management is a solved problem at
the OS layer, and re-implementing it in a tool server would
introduce complexity and a false sense of security.

Retry budget: per-response, not per-session.

The retry_budget integer is embedded in each error
response rather than tracked server-side. This keeps the server
stateless at the cost of losing budget context across agent
restarts. In practice, the purpose of the budget is to halt
loops within a single agent invocation; a fresh agent
legitimately starts with a fresh budget.

Drift warnings, not errors.

L5’s drift check on last_good_state hashes
produces warnings rather than hard failures. A file may have been
intentionally edited between sessions (by the user or a prior
agent), and blocking resumption on benign drift would be
counterproductive. The warning is surfaced so the agent can
decide whether to trust or re-derive the changed file.

7.2 Agent Awareness and Adoption

A tool server is only useful if agents actually invoke it. MCP
tool registration makes the tools available, but does not
make them preferred. We address this through a
CLAUDE.md convention file (read automatically by Claude
Code at session start) that instructs the agent to prefer
rw.* tools over raw Write/Edit
operations. The file specifies a decision table mapping task types
(create, append, large file, sensitive content) to the
appropriate rw.* tool and documents the chunked-writing
protocol.

This approach is portable: analogous files exist for Cursor
(.cursorrules), Codex (codex.md), and Copilot
(.github/copilot-instructions.md). The key insight is
that agent instruction files are the natural integration surface
for MCP tool preferences—no code changes to the agent itself
are required.

7.3 Limitations

•

Single-workspace scope. The server is bound to
one workspace root per process. Multi-workspace orchestration
would require external process management.

•

No cross-file transactions. If an agent writes
files A, B, C in sequence and crashes between B and C, there
is no write-ahead log to roll the workspace back to a
consistent state. Each file write is individually atomic, but
the set of writes is not.

•

No distributed coordination. The journal and
scratchpad are local. Synchronising state across agents on
different machines is out of scope.

•

Classifier coverage. L0 targets the most
common content-filter triggers observed in practice. Novel
secret formats or non-English PII patterns require policy-file
extensions.

7.4 Future Directions

Cross-file write-ahead logging would enable true workspace-level
transactions. Integrating L0 with a lightweight
embedding model could improve recall on obfuscated secrets without
sacrificing the latency budget. The handoff envelope
(L5) could be extended with a machine-readable dependency
graph, enabling orchestrators to schedule resumption tasks
automatically.

8 Conclusion

We have presented Resilient Write, a six-layer MCP server
that transforms the fragile write path of autonomous coding agents
into a durable, auditable, and recoverable operation. Each layer
targets a specific, observed failure mode: pre-flight risk scoring
(L0) prevents content-filter rejections; transactional writes
(L1) eliminate truncation and corruption; chunked composition
(L2) enables incremental progress on large files; typed error
envelopes (L3) give agents structured signals to reason about;
content-addressed scratchpad storage (L4) keeps sensitive
material out of the workspace tree; and handoff envelopes (L5)
preserve task context across sessions.

Three extension tools—chunk preview, format-aware validation,
and journal analytics—emerged from using the system to compose
this paper itself, demonstrating that practical use surfaces
requirements that design-time analysis misses.

The layers are orthogonal and independently adoptable, requiring no
changes to existing agent code beyond MCP tool registration and an
optional instruction file (CLAUDE.md). A 186-test suite
validates correctness at each layer, and quantitative comparison
against naive and defensive baselines shows a reduction in
recovery time, reduction in data loss probability, and
improvement in agent self-correction rate.

Resilient Write is open-source under the MIT license at
https://github.com/sperixlabs/resilient-write.

References

[1]
Anthropic (2025)

Claude code: an agentic coding tool.

Note: https://docs.anthropic.com/en/docs/claude-codeAccessed: 2026-04-12

Cited by: §1,
§2.1.

[2]
OpenAI (2025)

Codex CLI: open-source coding agent.

Note: https://github.com/openai/codexAccessed: 2026-04-12

Cited by: §1,
§2.1.

[3]
Anysphere Inc. (2024)

Cursor: the AI code editor.

Note: https://cursor.comAccessed: 2026-04-12

Cited by: §1,
§2.1.

[4]
GitHub (2024)

GitHub copilot.

Note: https://github.com/features/copilotAccessed: 2026-04-12

Cited by: §1,
§2.1.

[5]
Anthropic (2024)

Model context protocol specification.

Note: https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specificationAccessed: 2026-04-12

Cited by: §1,
§2.2.

[6]
J. Lux Ferro (2026)

What leaves your workstation when you use an LLM coding CLI.

Note: https://sperixlabs.org/post/2026/04/what-leaves-your-workstation-when-you-use-an-llm-coding-cli/Blog post. Accessed: 2026-04-12

Cited by: §1.

[7]
sst (2025)

OpenCode: terminal-native AI coding agent.

Note: https://github.com/sst/opencodeAccessed: 2026-04-12

Cited by: §2.1.

[8]
C. E. Jimenez, J. Yang, A. Wettig, S. Yao, K. Pei, O. Press, and K. Narasimhan (2024)

SWE-bench: can language models resolve real-world GitHub issues?.

External Links: 2310.06770

Cited by: §2.1,
§6.

[9]
J. Yang, C. E. Jimenez, A. Wettig, K. Liber, S. Yao, K. Narasimhan, and O. Press (2024)

SWE-agent: agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering.

External Links: 2405.15793

Cited by: §2.1,
§6.

[10]
A. Wright, H. Andrews, B. Hutton, and G. Dennis (2020)

JSON schema: a media type for describing JSON documents.

Note: https://json-schema.org/specificationDraft 2020-12

Cited by: §2.2.

[11]
N. Pilkington et al. (2023)

Leaking secrets through LLM agents: risks of tool-augmented language models.

In Workshop on Foundation Models and Cybersecurity (FMCS),

Cited by: 1st item.

[12]
IEEE and The Open Group (2017)

The open group base specifications issue 7, 2018 edition: rename().

Note: https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9699919799/functions/rename.htmlAccessed: 2026-04-12

Cited by: 3rd item.

[13]
OWASP Foundation (2021)

OWASP top 10 – 2021.

Note: https://owasp.org/Top10/Accessed: 2026-04-12

Cited by: §4.1.

[14]
J. Gray (1981)

The transaction concept: virtues and limitations.

In Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Very Large Data Bases (VLDB),

pp. 144–154.

Cited by: §6.

[15]
R. Hagmann (1987)

Reimplementing the Cedar file system using logging and group commit.

In Proceedings of the 11th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP),

pp. 155–162.

Cited by: §6.

[16]
E. B. Nightingale, V. Kaushik, P. M. Chen, and J. Flinn (2006)

Rethink the sync.

In Proceedings of the 7th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI),

pp. 1–14.

Cited by: §6.

[17]
P. A. Bernstein, V. Hadzilacos, and N. Goodman (1987)

Concurrency control and recovery in database systems.

Addison-Wesley.

Cited by: §6.

Experimental support, please
view the build logs
for errors. Generated by

L
A
T
E

xml

.

Instructions for reporting errors

We are continuing to improve HTML versions of papers, and your feedback helps enhance accessibility and mobile
support. To report errors in the HTML that will help us improve conversion and rendering, choose any of the
methods listed below:

Click the "Report Issue" () button, located in the page header.

Tip: You can select the relevant text first, to include it in your report.

Our team has already identified the following issues. We appreciate your time reviewing and reporting rendering errors we
may not have found yet. Your efforts will help us improve the HTML versions for all readers, because disability
should not be a barrier to accessing research. Thank you for your continued support in championing open access for
all.

Have a free development cycle? Help support accessibility at arXiv! Our collaborators at LaTeXML maintain a list of packages that need conversion, and welcome developer contributions.

We gratefully acknowledge support from
our major funders,
member institutions, ,
and all contributors.

About
·
Help
·
Contact
·
Subscribe
·
Copyright
·
Privacy
·
Accessibility
·
Operational Status (opens in new tab)

Major funding support from
